                                                   Review of Educational Research
                                           Summer2000, Vol. 70, No. 2, pp. 181-214




  Learning from Examples: Instructional Principles
       from the Worked Examples Research

                           Robert K. Atkinson
                        Mississippi State University
                              Sharon J. Derry
                     Universi O' of Wisconsin - Madison
                              Alexander Renkl
                      University of Freiburg, Germany
                             Donald Wortham
                             UNext Corporation

    Worked examples are instructional devices that provide an expert's
    problem solution for a learner to study. Worked-examples research is
    a cognitive-experimental program that has relevance to classroom in-
    struction and the broader educational research community. A frame-
    work for organizing the findings of this research is proposed, leading
    to instructional design principles. For instance, one instructional de-
    sign principle suggests that effective examples have highly integrated
    components. They employ multiple modalities in presentation and em-
    phasize conceptual structure by labeling or segmenting. At the lesson
    level, effective instruction employs multiple examples for each concep-
    tual problem type, varies example formats within problem type, and
    employs surface features to signal deep structure. Also, examples should
    be presented in close proximity to matched practice problems. More-
    over, learners can be encouraged through direct training or by the
    structure of the worked example to actively self:explain examples.
    Worked examples are associated with early stages of skill develop-
    ment, but the design principles are relevant to constructivist research
    and teaching.

                           The Historical Context
   In recent years, learning from "worked examples" has received a consider-
able amount of attention from researchers (e.g., Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, &
Glaser, 1989; Ward & Sweller, 1990), particularly in such fields as mathematics,
physics, and computer programming. Although there is no precise definition,
worked examples share certain family resemblance (Wittgenstein, 1953). As
instructional devices, they typically include a problem statement and a proce-
dure for solving the problem; together, these are meant to show how other
similar problems might be solved. In a sense, they provide an expert's problem-

                                                                               181
Atkinson, Dero', Renkl, and Wortham
solving model for the learner to study and emulate. Examples typically present
solutions in a step-by-step fashion (see Figure 1). In many cases, worked ex-
amples include auxiliary representations of a given problem, such as diagrams.



         PROBLEM TEXT: From a ballot box containing 3 red balls
         and 2 white balls, two balls are randomly drawn. The chosen
         balls are not put back into the ballot box. What is the prob-
         ability that a red ball is drawn first and a white ball second?

         SOLUTION:
          STEP 1:
          Total number of balls:                                5
          Number ~f red balls:                                  3
          Probability of red ball on first draw:                3/5

           STEP 2:
           Total number of balls after first draw:             4
           Number of white balls:                              2
           Probability of white ball on second draw:           2/4

           STEP 3:
           Probability that a red ball is drawn first and a white ball is
           second: 3/5"2/4 = 6/20 = 3/10
         ANSWER: The probability that a red ball is drawn first and a
         white ball is second is 3/10.


      FIGURE 1. Worked example fi'om Renkl, Atkinson, and Maier (2000)

    Even though learning from worked examples has recently attracted much
attention, the notion of learning by example is not new. Indeed, it has been a
major theme in educational research for at least the past four decades. During
the mid-1950s to the 1970s, cognitive and educational psychologists adopted
the learning-by-example paradigm to examine and describe the processes in-
volved in concept formation (e.g., Bourne, Goldstein, & Link, 1964; Bruner,
Goodnow, & Austin, 1956; Tennyson, Wooley~ & Merrill, 1972). While the
examples employed by these researchers were dissimilar to worked examples in
many respects, nevertheless, they shared the same fundamental purpose: to il-
lustrate a principle or pattern. A typical study of concept learning by example
measured students' ability to identify a member of a target concept after view-
ing numerous instances and noninstances of it, to learn whether students could
successfully derive the underlying concept common to the examples. From the
perspective of educational psychologists, these studies could inform educa-
tional practice, particularly by showing how examples should be selected, pre-
sented, and sequenced (for review, see Tennyson & Cocchiarella, 1986). This

182
                                                          Learning From Examples
focus on presentation and sequencing of examples paralleled the call for empiri-
cal investigations articulated in classic position papers, such as Bruner's (1966)
Toward a Theor)., of Instruction and Glaser's (1976) Components of a Psychol-
ogy of Instruction: Toward a Science of Design.
    Although a considerable amount of research in the mid-1970s was dedicated
to identifying ways to facilitate concept learning, a growing number of
cognitively oriented educational researchers began to look beyond the goal
merely of acquiring discrete concepts. Instead, researchers turned their focus to
more complex forms of knowledge and learning (Brewer & Nakamura, 1984).
Topics of interest included studying how experts and novices used knowledge
to interpret experience and solve problems in domains such as chess, algebra,
physics, and geometry. Research indicated that experts typically focus on deeper
structural aspects of problems, whereas novices are often misled by surface fea-
tures (e.g., Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981; Chi, Glaser, & Rees, 1982; Silver,
 1979). Often, the concept of the schema (Rumelhart & Ortony, 1977; Silver &
Marshall, 1990) was used to account for performance differences between ex-
perts and novices (cf. VanLehn, 1990; Chi et al., 1981; Chi et al., 1982; Hinsley,
Hayes, & Simon, 1977; Silver, 1979). Schemas were conceived to be complex
memory structures possessed by experts that enabled them to recognize a prob-
lem as a member of a class (e.g., a type of physics problem) and retrieve an
interpretation and procedure appropriate for that class.
   Working in this milieu, Sweller and his colleagues (e.g., Mawer & Sweller,
1982; Owen & Sweller, 1985; Sweller & Levine, 1982; Sweller, Mawer, & Howe,
1982; Sweller, Mawer, & Ward, 1983) began investigating how students learn
schemas, patterns that facilitate problem solving, through conventional, prac-
tice-oriented instruction. These studies focused on methods of increasing nov-
ices' awareness of problem structure through practice (Owen & Sweller, 1985;
Sweller et al., 1983). It is important to note that this research was conducted at
a time when problem-solving practice was a preferred instructional approach,
endorsed by many prominent educators and researchers. As a noted mathematics
education professor declared, "The best way to teach children how to solve
problems is to give them lots of problems to solve" (Van Engen, 1959, p. 74).
Further, the research showed that the study of expertise was consonant with this
thinking. After studying chess experts, Chase and Simon (1973) concluded that
"practice is the major independent variable in the acquisition of skill" (p. 279).
   However, Sweller's research program soon accumulated empirical evidence
showing that traditional, practice-based problem solving was less than an ideal
method for improving problem-solving performance when compared to instruc-
tion that paired practice problems with worked examples (Cooper & Sweller,
1987; Sweller & Cooper, 1985). Laboratory protocol studies revealed that when
presented with traditional practice exercises, students tended to employ typical
novice strategies, such as trial and error, while students presented with worked
examples before solving often employed more efficient problem-solving strate-
gies and appeared to focus on structural aspects of problems. A number of
researchers, again including Sweller and his colleagues, investigated the effi-
cacy of using more worked examples in classroom instruction. Zhu and Simon
(1987) conducted the first, and possibly the most widely cited, of these studies.
Studies by Carroll (1994) and Ward and Sweller (1990) also provided evidence
                                                                              183
Atkinsem, Dero'. Renkl, and Wortham
in favor of worked-example instruction in the classroom rather than strictly
problem-solving practice.
     Sweller's research program, along with the classroom investigations noted
above, motivated a new and productive strand of research, widely called "worked
examples research," and it is this literature that serves as the basis for this
review. Although Sweller, van Merrienboer, and Pass (1998) recently published
a review addressing instructional design issues related to worked examples,
they focused on literature published by Sweller and his colleagues and only on
instructional principles derived from Sweller's cognitive load theory. Their re-
view thus omitted a substantial portion of the literature and much that has been
learned about worked examples instruction, such as individual differences in
example processing (self-explanations), and the impact of situational factors.
We did not limit our analysis to the research findings from one research group
or theoretical perspective, but instead searched for a set of design principles that
could be derived from a broader set of studies representing additional research
groups and theoretical viewpoints. Moreover, our goal was to move beyond
communicating to the worked examples research audience only. We wished to
draw attention to how the findings from the worked examples paradigm can
inform a larger educational community that is using and investigating a broad
range of complex instructional paradigms that employ problem solving and
examples to promote learning.
    We begin our review by justifying our belief that the worked examples re-
search has potentially broad implications for educational practice. We then
"'situate" the place of worked examples in the context of a widely accepted
theory of learning. Next, we review the worked examples literature and derive a
set of instructional principles from this work. We then propose a framework
representing a causal model incorporating the major factors that have been
shown to influence learning from worked examples. In the fourth section of this
review, we interpret this model with respect to its implications for other instruc-
tional approaches and in this context, present our recommendations for re-di-
recting research dealing with example-based learning and instruction.
             The Worked Example Paradigm as Basic Research
   Acknowledging that much (though by no means all) of the worked examples
research to date has been conducted in controlled laboratory settings using
textbook problems from mathematics and science, we begin by reflecting on the
"place" of such controled experimentation within the broader educational re-
search enterprise. The contention that controlled, experimental studies could
have implications for the complex, bustling world of real classrooms can be
challenged on the grounds that important social, physical and cultural contexts
shape student development and are often "controlled out" of educational ex-
periments. Of course, laboratory findings alone cannot inform educational
practice. Yet there is very strong evidence (see, e.g., Bruer, 1993; McGilly,
1998) and argument (Shuell, 1996) that controlled experimental research
grounded in cognitive science has substantially improved educational practice.
The 1998 volume edited by McGilly provides stories of many widespread and
successfnl classroom retbrms - led by such scholars as Carl Bereiter, John
Bransford, Ann Brown, Joseph Campione, Howard Gardner, Jim Minstrell,

184
                                                            Learning From Examples
Marlene Scardamalia, Robert Sternberg, and others - that were founded on a
laboratory-based cognitive science. Chapters describe how a process that in-
volved the testing, in classroom settings, of fundamental ideas about learning
and development drawn from basic cognitive research advanced knowledge
about instructional practice. Reciprocal teaching (Palincsar & Brown, 1984) is a
classic example of a cognitively-based instructional approach, first investigated
in a controlled setting, that has been adopted widely and proven immensely
successful classroom contexts.
   We hold that the explicit understanding of learning processes obtained
through controlled experimentation, including laboratory experimentation, is
an important part of the scientific knowledge base about teaching and learning,
which, in turn has had a significant positive impact on instructional research
and practice in classrooms. Transfer from laboratory to classroom is possible
because, while there are many differences between laboratory and classroom
environments, there are also many constants across settings in terms of students'
basic neural and cognitive processing, as well as the structure of interventions
and materials investigated. Similar arguments were made by Scribner (1984),
who held that models for practical problem solving in working contexts could
not be developed "without reiterative cycles of both laboratory and non-labora-
tory based studies" (p. 37). It is in this vein that we present the worked examples
research as a cognitively-oriented experimental program that has produced find-
ings of relevance and importance that should be communicated to the broader
educational research audience.
             Worked Examples and Acquisition of Cognitive Skills
   The worked examples literature is particularly relevant to programs of in-
struction that seek to promote skills acquisition, a goal of many workplace
training environments as well as instructional programs in domains such as
music, chess, athletics, programming, and (arguably) basic mathematics. From
this viewpoint, learning from worked examples is of major importance in initial
stages of cognitive skills acquisition. What we mean by initial skills acquisi-
tion can be more precisely defined by referring to Anderson, Fincham, and
Douglass (1997). These authors proposed a four-stage model within a well-
known cognitive theoretical framework called ACT-R and argue that skills ac-
quisition involves four overlapping stages. In the first stage, learners solve prob-
lems by analogy, that is, they refer to known examples and try to relate them to
the problem to be solved. In the second stage, learners develop abstract declara-
tive rules, verbal knowledge that guides their problem solving. Only after longer
practice do they move to the third stage, in which performance becomes smooth
and rapid. When this stage is achieved, learners no longer have to follow their
learned verbal rules, which is a slow process, but can deal with familiar prob-
lems or aspects of problems quickly and automatically, without using many
attention resources. This is possible through practice--the verbal memory evolves
to incorporate a different, procedural form of memory. In the fourth stage, learn-
ers who have practiced many different types of problems have many examples
in mind. Hence they can often retrieve a solution quickly and directly from
memory. The authors emphasize that these stages overlap in the sense that a
specific learner's flexibility in using different methods, such as analogy or ab-
stract rule, depends upon the familiarity of the specific problem at hand.
                                                                                185
Atkinson, Der~, Renkl, and Wortham
    From the viewpoint of skills acquisition, then, the importance of studying
examples relative to pure problem solving practice is very high when a student
is in the first stage (analogy) or is beginning to enter the second stage (abstract
rules of learning). Studying worked examples is not the preferred method when
the instructional goal is to facilitate the attainment of the third stage, automatic
performance, where problem solving practice is of critical importance. However,
even after reaching the fourth stage, experts may study complex performance by
other experts in order to learn stylistic techniques or fine-tune their own com-
plex performances.
   Teaching by Worked Example: Research and Instructional Principles
   Although the early research demonstrated that worked examples were
instructionally effective, our review suggests specific factors that moderate their
effectiveness. These include (i) intra-example features, in other words, how the
example is designed, particularly the way the example's solution is presented,
(2) inter-example features, principally certain relationships among multiple ex-
amples and practice problems within a lesson, and (3) individual differences in
example processing on the part of students, especially the way in which stu-
dents "self-explain" the examples.
                             lntra-Example Features
   Researchers (e.g., Catrambone, 1994b; Catrambone & Holyoak, 1990; Mwangi
& Sweller, 1998; Ward & Sweller, 1990; Zhu & Simon, 1987) have suggested
that the design or structure of worked examples plays a critical role in their
effectiveness. In fact, Mwangi and Sweller (1998) suggest that "the structure of
worked examples may substantially compromise the benefits derived from study-
ing them" (p. 174). In particular, how to integrate the various components mak-
ing up an example appears to be critical. Principles of integration can be de-
rived from three sources, the first of which is work that examines the integration
of diagrams and text. The second is work that investigates the simultaneous
presentation of diagrams and aurally presented procedures. Finally, studies in-
vestigating the effects of subgoal labels within examples have led to important
design principles. We cover each of these in turn.
Integrating Text and Diagrams
   While worked examples can play a crucial role in guiding the learning pro-
cess (Carroll, 1994; Cooper & Sweller, 1987; Paas & Van Merrienboer, 1994;
Sweller & Cooper, 1985; Ward & Sweller, 1990; Zhu & Simon, 1987), Sweller
and his colleagues (Mwangi & Sweller, 1998; Tarmizi & Sweller, 1988; Ward &
Sweller, i 990) suspected that, because of their structure, some worked examples
might burden the student's working memory. The imposition of a heavy cogni-
tive load was thought to negate the benefits of studying worked examples. In
particular, these authors focused on the cognitive load imposed on learners
studying geometry worked examples, which required the learners to integrate
the information from diagrammed problems with textual explanations referring
to the same concepts. They proposed that instructional material requiring a
student to split attention among multiple sources of information might impose
a heavy cognitive load. Tramizi and Sweller (1988) labeled this phenomenon

186
                                                           Learning From Examples
the split-attention effect and hypothesized that it interfered with the student's
acquisition of schemas representing the basic domain concepts and principles
that students should learn from examples.
    Tarmizi and Sweller (1988) further hypothesized that requiring students to
 split their attention between multiple sources of information during example-
based geometry instruction would decrease subsequent problem-solving perfor-
mance, even for those students provided with worked examples. To examine
this supposition, they assigned participants in one experiment (Experiment 3)
of a multi-experiment study to a conventional problem solving condition (con-
trol); students in an experimental worked-example condition were asked to solve
six pairs of problems, where the six pairs of problems were similar to those in
the control condition but with one notable difference, that the first problem of
each pair was worked for them. During the learning phase, students in both
conditions were given a fixed period of time to study their respective condition-
specific material. The problems across both conditions involved two theorems
from circle geometry and required the participants to process and integrate sepa-
rately the problem statement, one or both of the theorems, and the problem
diagram. In addition to looking for performance differences between the two
conditions on a three-item posttest, such as time to solution and problem-solv-
ing strategy used, the authors also measured certain factors during the learning
phase, such as the number of problems processed, as well as the number of errors
and the time to solution on practice problems.
    Results of this experiment supported Tarmizi and Sweller's (1988) hypoth-
esis that requiring students to integrate multiple sources of information in in-
struction would be ineffective, even when presented in a worked-out format. In
contrast to the earlier studies, which detected a clear advantage for the worked
example format (Cooper & Sweller, 1987; Sweller & Cooper, 1985), they found
in this case no significant differences in favor of worked examples on any of the
measures. Instead, they found a difference in favor of conventional problem
solving on time-to-solution on the posttest. They concluded that the "guidance
provided by worked examples not only failed to facilitate subsequent perfor-
mance, it actually retarded learning" (Tarmizi & Sweller, 1988, p. 431). In sum,
Tarmizi and Sweller found that the split-attention format, at least in the materi-
als they tested, reliably reduced the advantage of worked examples compared to
conventional problem-solving practice.
    Following their discovery of the split-attention effect, Tarmizi and Sweller
(1988) proposed that the "presentation of geometry worked examples in a for-
mat reducing the multiple sources of information should increase the facilita-
tory effect of the material" (p. 425). Examining this hypothesis in Experiments
4 and 5, they questioned whether presenting students with worked examples
that integrate the diagrammatic problem representations and the textual expla-
nations relevant to the diagram--thus alleviating the burden of the split-atten-
tion effect--was more effective than more conventional problem solving. Rely-
ing on essentially the same experimental design as in Experiment 3, the authors
found that simply restructuring the worked example by integrating verbal ex-
planations into a diagram enhanced learning in comparison to conventional
problem solving and split-source worked examples. Tarmizi and Sweller con-
cluded, "Worked examples that require students to attend to multiple sources of

                                                                              187
Atkinson, Derr3.',Renkl. and Wortham
information which then must be mentally integrated are cognitively demanding
and interfere with, rather than facilitate, learning" (p. 435). The solution to the
split-attention effect that they proposed is to integrate textual explanations into
the accompanying auxiliary representation wherever possible.
   In a subsequent study, Ward and Sweller (1990) examined the impact of the
split-attention effect, but with two slight modifications in the former study's
design: They examined it under traditional classroom conditions and within the
domain of physics. Making these modifications, they essentially replicated the
findings of Tarmizi and Sweller (1988). In three long-term experiments con-
ducted with students in a high school physics programs, they found that the
split-attention effect was manifested when students were presented with worked
examples in homework that required them simultaneously to attend to multiple
sources of information related to geometric optics problems. But they found, as
did Tarmizi and Sweller (1988), that simply reformatting the examples to inte-
grate verbal explanations, such as the description of problem subgoals, en-
hances learning.
hltegrating Aural and Visual h~)rmation
   If integrating the visual elements in an example facilitates understanding,
might integrating aural and visual presentation of material boost problem-solv-
ing performance and facilitate problem solving as well? In a recent study,
Mousavi, Low, and Sweller (1995) addressed this question in a series of experi-
ments by examining whether sprit attention might be mitigated by presenting
geometry problem and proof statements in auditory, rather than visual, form.
Although each experiment described in their study involved a slightly different
manipulation of worked-example instruction itself, the various experiments shared
a common design. First, during each experiment, the participants proceeded
through a learning phase, where they were presented with two pairs of items,
each consisting of a worked example and a similar practice problem. During this
learning phase, the average time spent studying the examples and solving the
practice problems, as well as the number of participants who were unable to
solve each problem (i.e., nonsolvers), were recorded. This phase was followed
by a four-item posttest, which consisted of two problems similar to the problems
from the learning phase and a pair of transfer problems that required the partici-
pants to apply their knowledge in a novel way. As the participants solved the
various posttest items, the average time spent solving each of the problems (i.e.,
posttest processing time) and the number of nonsolvers was noted in each ex-
periment.
   In Experiments 1 and 2, Mousavi et al. (1995) compared the effectiveness of
three differently formatted worked examples: (1) visual-visual, where a geom-
etry diagram and its associated statements (i.e., problem and proof) were both
presented visually; (2) visual-auditory, where a diagram was presented visually
and its associated statements aurally; and (3) simultaneous, where a diagram
was presented visually and its associated statements were presented both visu-
ally and aurally. They found modest evidence that the mixed-mode formats
(both visual-auditory and simultaneous) were superior to the more conven-
tional single-mode format (visual-visual), since the students in the mixed-mode
condition spent less time solving the test problems than their single-mode

188
                                                            Learning FromExamples
counterparts, even when the time spent studying the conditions was controlled.
In Experiments 3 and 4, the visual-visual and visual-auditory formats were again
used, but this time the diagram and problem statements were presented either
simultaneously, as in Experiment I and 2, or sequentially. Across these two
experiments, once again, the authors found that, irrespective of the presentation
format, the processing time of the participants exposed to the mixed-mode ex-
amples was superior to that of their counterparts using single-mode examples,
even when the study time was equalized across the mixed-mode and single-
mode examples. In sum, the authors showed that learning--as demonstrated by
the efficiency of subsequent problem-solving performance--was consistently
enhanced by the dual-presentation mode. It is also worth noting that additional
support for incorporating a dual-presentation mode into instructional material
can be found in the research conducted by Mayer and his colleges (Mayer,
 1997; Mayer, Moreno, Boire, & Vagge, 1999) on multimedia learning. In a
series of studies, they have consistently found that a mixed-mode presentation
format facilitates learning in scientific context.
    Still, a caveat remains. A recent study by Jeung, Chandler, and Sweller (1997)
found that under certain "high visual" conditions, structuring a worked ex-
ample to include both visual and verbal modes did not represent an improve-
ment over a visual-only worked example. The authors suspected that presenting
visually complex geometry examples with auditory procedures required the
learner to devote a significant portion of working memory to locating the por-
tion of the geometry diagram to which the auditory statements referred. Jeung et
al. tested this supposition, in part, by adopting two of the conditions from the
Mousavi et al. (1995) study, the visual-visual condition and audio-visual con-
dition. They also created a third condition by adapting the audio-visual condi-
tion to include a visual indicator that directed the learner's attention to the part
of the diagram to which the audio----consisting of problem statements and proofs--
was referring (audio-visual-flashing group). Students in the three conditions
were exposed to a set of instructional materials (i.e., two example-practice prob-
lem pairs), with half of the students in each group being assigned high-search
material and the other half low-search material. The complexity of the search
depended upon the manner in which the geometry diagrams were labeled in the
two examples, with the high-search material using twice as many labels as the
low-search material to convey the same information. As Jeung et al. (1997) had
predicted, although participants in the audio-visual condition solved several of
the problems on the four-item posttest faster than their visual-visual counter-
parts when encountering low-search material, there was little or no effect for
presenting information in dual modes under high-visual search conditions. How-
ever, the situation changed when a visual cue, such as a flashing highlight,
linked auditory procedures to the relevant part of the complex geometry dia-
gram. That is, the students presented with the set of audio-visual flashing ex-
amples outperformed their peers in the other two conditions. According to Jeung
et al. (1997), simply adding electronic flashing to a dual-mode example can
lead to enhanced learning, even under high-search conditions, by encouraging
the learner to devote cognitive resources to understanding the example, as op-
posed to dedicating them to search and recognition.
                                                                                189
Atkinson. Dero; Renkl. and Wortham
Integrating Steps and Subgoals
    Over the past few years, Catrambone ( 1994a, 1994b, 1995a, 1995b, 1996, in
press; Catrambone & Holyoak, 1990) has carefully examined the way in which
another instructional design enhancement, the structuring of examples to em-
phasize conceptually meaningful chunks of a problem's solution or subgoals,
impacts learning. He has proposed that formatting an example's solution to
accentuate its subgoals, by either affixing a label to them or simply visually
isolating them, can assist a learner in actively inducing the example's underly-
ing goal structure, which can guide a learner to discovering useful generaliza-
tions. Catrambone suggests that these structural cues enhance learning by en-
couraging learners to determine first the goal or function of the subgoals and
then to explain to themselves why a series of steps are grouped together. This
cognitive activity presumably helps promote induction of deeper structure rep-
resenting domain principles, or schemas.
    In his first study dedicated to examining the effectiveness of salient subgoals
in worked examples, Catrambone and Holyoak (1990) asked college students to
learn the Poisson distribution under two conditions: (1) highlighted, where the
subgoals on tour worked examples were made salient with annotations, or (2)
not highlighted, where the same four examples were used, but without the
subgoal-oriented annotations. The authors looked for differences between the
two conditions in a six-item transfer posttest, which contained two problems
similar to the worked examples and four problems that were not, but that could
only be solved by making adaptations to the subgoais found in the examples.
Thus, the last Ibur items were novel problems that required the learners to for-
mulate solutions that were distinct from those demonstrated in the training
examples. Although the participants in both conditions performed comparably
on all of the similar items as well as on most of the novel items, the participants
in the highlighted condition outperformed their peers in the non-highlighted
condition on one novel transfer item. The authors concluded that the "use of
annotations in examples to highlight subgoals and methods seem to increase
the likelihood that a learner will modify an old method rather than apply it
without adaptation" (Catrambone & Holyoak, 1990, p. 600).
    Across a series of subsequent studies involving a variety of transfer tasks,
Catrambone (1994b, 1995a, 1995b, 1996, 1998; Catrambone & Holyoak, 1990)
consistently documented that learners exposed to examples that emphasize
subgoals outperformed peers presented with traditionally formatted examples.
In particular, he documented the efficacy of two techniques designed to accen-
tuate an example's discrete subgoais: labels and the visual separation of steps.
Although a label may consist of a verbal specification of the subgoal to which
it is attached, Catrambone (1994a, 1995b, 1996) found that it is the presence of
a label, not necessarily its semantic content, that influences subgoal formation.
He asserted that labels serve to chunk a set of steps together and that it is this
function that encourages a learner to explain why the steps are grouped to-
gether. Moreover, Catrambone (1994b, 1995a) found that visually separating
steps, by segmenting the problem's solution steps to reflect its subgoals and
placing each unlabeled group of steps on separate lines, was just as effective in
subgoal learning as explicitly labeling steps. In sum, Catrambone has convinc-

190
                                                           Learning FromExamples
ingly demonstrated that structuring worked examples so they include cues de-
signed to highlight meaningful chunks of information reflecting a problem's
underlying conceptual meaning can enhance a learner's ability to learn from
them and can help learners to be more successful solving novel problems.
Summary: Intra-Example Features
   A number of principles can be derived from research on how to design and
structure instructional examples. First, examples should be constructed to maxi-
mally integrate all sources of information--including diagrams, text, and aural
presentation--into one unified presentation, since splitting students' attention
across multiple, non-integrated informational sources may cause cognitive over-
load and impair learning. However, when an example display is complex, which
occurs when an example references a complex diagram, simultaneous aural ex-
planation must be accompanied by a method for explicitly directing students'
attention to pertinent parts of the example as it is being described or discussed.
Otherwise students will expend too much effort trying to locate those parts of
the example that the aural presentation is referencing, which creates cognitive
overload. In addition, because subgoai tasks within complex problems typically
represent important conceptual ideas that students need to learn, instructional
effectiveness is enhanced when examples clearly demarcate a problem's subgoai
structure, either by labeling each step or by visually isolating steps in an ex-
ample display.
                    Inter-Example Features: Lesson Design
   In addition to issues regarding the design of worked examples, we must
consider how the examples are sequenced and arranged during instruction. As
Bruner (1966) and Giaser (1976) suggested, the sequence used in presenting
instructional material is as important as the structure of that material. Research
on the use of examples in lesson design has focused on several issues, including
(1) the number of examples to present during instruction, (2) how and whether
examples should be varied within a lesson, (3) how themes or "surface stories"
might be varied to instructional advantage, and (4) how practice and examples
should be intermingled.
Multiple Examples
    Most educators conducting research on worked examples or, peripherally, on
analogical reasoning, claim that multiple examples or analogues are necessary
when students are asked to learn complex concepts during instruction (e.g.,
Cooper & Sweller, 1987; Gick & Holyoak, 1983; Reed, 1993; Spiro, Feltovich,
Coulson, & Anderson, 1989; Sweller & Cooper, 1985). The first empirical ex-
amination of this issue, however, can be found in a study conducted by Reed
and Bolstad (1991), in which the authors set out to test directly whether a single
example alone can facilitate learning, or whether it is first necessary to provide
at least two examples.
    In an effort to address this question, Reed and Bolstad (1991) assigned col-
lege students the task of mastering word problems that involved workers operat-
ing at different rates, which required the use of the following equation: (Rate1 x
Time0 + (Rate2 x Time2) = Tasks Completed. The students were assigned to one
                                                                              191
Atkinson, Derr); Renkl, and Wortham
of six conditions, where the participants were presented with either (1) a simple
example, which provided a basic illustration of how to employ the equation
necessary for solving work problems, (2) a complex example, which made it
necessary in some areas to transform the elements of the problem (rate, time, and
task) before the equation could be properly employed, (3) a set of procedures,
which described the fundamental steps necessary for solving work problems in
general, (4) a simple example, plus procedures, (5) a complex example, plus
procedures, or (6) both a simple example and complex example. Following
instruction, the students were provided with eight test problems that differed
from the simple example in terms of the number of transformations, ranging
from zero to three, depending on whether any or all of the rate, time, or task
elements of the problem needed to be changed before the problem could be
solved using the work equation.
   As Reed and Bolstad (1991) predicted, those students provided with both
simple and complex examples outperformed all others on the entire posttest,
including those with a single example, as well as those provided with an ex-
ample plus procedures. They contended that this result indicates that two ex-
amples can facilitate learning better than a single example, even when the single
example is coupled with the presentation of a set of procedures relevant to the
problem at hand. In fact, the authors found that it was not necessary to provide
an example for each possible test problem despite the fact that several of the test
problems differed structurally from the examples in one or more ways. Accord-
ing to Reed and Bolstad, this implied that students were able to use information
flexibly from the simple and complex examples to solve the transfer problems.
Effects of Va~ing Problem Types Within Lessons
    How does the variability of problems within a lesson affect learning? Paas
and Van Merrienboer (1994) examined this question in the context of teaching
secondary technical school students problem solving in geometry. On the one
hand, increasing the variability within a lesson makes sense, if acquisition of
robust problem-solving schemas depends upon understanding the range of con-
ditions under which solution procedures may be effectively applied. On the
other hand, increased variability in example design may increase cognitive
demand, which interferes with learning. The authors expected that problem de-
signs that failed to limit cognitive load could yield worse performance than
those that effectively limited load. Thus, the authors predicted that worked-
example instruction would lead to better problem-solving performance than
practice problems, a prediction consistent with the literature. They further pre-
dicted an interaction between lesson variability and type of instruction, in other
words, that students using worked examples with variable problem subtypes
would outperform students learning from equally variable conventional prob-
lem-solving formats, but not using worked examples.
    Paas and Van Merrienboer's (1994) study utilized four groups: low-variabil-
ity/practice, high-variability/practice, low-variability/example, and high-vari-
ability/example. Students in all four groups received general instruction in top-
ics such as determining line length in two-dimensional space and plotting coor-
dinates, given line-length. This general instruction was followed by either
problem-solving practice or worked-example instruction, depending upon the

192
                                                            Learning From Examples
group. The students studied six problems and their solutions (i.e., worked ex-
amples) in the two worked-example conditions; those in the two practice condi-
tions were asked to solve the six problems. Those students in the two high-
variability conditions received two different problem subtypes; one involved
line-length determination, the other coordinate plotting. Students in the low-
variability condition received only the former.
   Paas and Van Merrienboer (I 994) assessed the students' transfer performance
for the four conditions using a six-item posttest that required students to com-
bine various meaningful chunks (previously learned subgoals) in novel ways.
They found a main effect for example-based instruction on this measure. Con-
sistent with their prediction, they also found an interaction: Students in the
worked-example condition benefited more from lesson variability than students
in the practice condition. Furthermore, there was no main effect for variability,
suggesting that it is not a universal good. The results of this study suggested
that variability produces transfer benefits, but only in combination with instruc-
tion designed to minimize cognitive load, such as worked-example instruction.
Variabili~' in Surface Stories
   Now imagine that one wants to teach students how to discriminate between
two or more types of problems and solve each correctly. Should examples be
designed with surface stories that vary for similar problem types? Presumably,
this would lead students to learn that surface features are not the most reliable
method for categorizing problems. Or should examples rely on the same surface
story within a problem type to emphasize similarity? Ross (1989) noted that
"novices are likely to include superficial aspects of the task in their probes (and
their memory), so both structural and superficial aspects of the task may influ-
ence what is retrieved" (p. 441). In other words, research indicates that novices
tend to pay too much attention to problem context and too little attention to
problems' deeper conceptual structures. Based on this research, Ross suggested
that one possible way to design a lesson would be to make problems within the
same type superficially similar. For example, in a lesson on proportional reason-
ing, all mixture type problems could be presented with examples about making
lemonade, while all measurement conversion problems could be presented with
examples about building a deck. Ross presumed that this superficial similarity
among problems of similar structure would assist learners in categorizing the
problem types and, in turn, applying the appropriate method in solving the
problems. He went on to say that "as learners become more able and confident,
they could be weaned away from their reliance on superficial similarities until
they are able to categorize the problems by structural aspects only" (p. 464).
   Quilici and Mayer (1996) investigated this approach by developing two
example sets for teaching statistical concepts, one that emphasized surface fea-
tures and one that emphasized structure. In the example set that emphasized
surface, the very. similar surface story was used for each problem of a given
problem type; in the example that emphasized structure, a different surface
story was used for each problem of a given problem type. According to the
authors, putting emphasis on structure requires "arranging example problems so
that (a) each problem type is exemplified by a battery of different cover stories
that differ from one another, and (b) the same battery of cover stories is used
                                                                               193
Atkhzson, Derr3'. Renkl, attd Wortham
across the problem types" (Quilici & Mayer, 1996, p. 157). Participants were
randomly assigned to a structure-emphasizing example, a surface-emphasizing
example, or a no-example condition. Whereas the no-example participants were
not provided any instructional material, the students in the structure- and sur-
face-emphasizing examples were asked to study material about three types of
statistical problems (e.g., t test, chi-square, and correlation) that consisted of
either three structure- or surface-emphasizing examples, respectively, to depict
each problem type. The authors used a sort task as the dependent measure,
which they found useful for evaluating the degree to which students developed
organizing schemas for a set of problems. As predicted, they found that the
students in the structure-emphasizing condition sorted by structure more often
than their counterparts in the surface emphasizing and the no-example condi-
tions, which did not differ significantly from each other.
    In an effort to extend this finding beyond a sort task, Quilici and Mayer
(1996) followed up this experiment with one that provided students with condi-
tion-appropriate material to learn just two problem types (e.g., t test and correla-
tion). Participating students completed two sessions. In each, they studied a set
of two examples and accompanying solutions, followed by two practice prob-
lems to solve. After instruction, the students were required to take a posttest
consisting of four problems, two from each problem type. The participants'
ability to select the correct statistical test to apply to each of the problems
served as the primary dependent measure. The authors found that the partici-
pants in the structure-emphasizing condition correctly selected the appropriate
test statistically more frequently than their peers in the surface-emphasizing
condition. According to the authors, this result indicated that the participants
exposed to the structure-emphasizing examples were less reliant on the surface
features of problems and more reliant on their structural features during catego-
rization than their counterparts who were presented with surface-emphasizing
examples. Based on the findings across their experiments, Quilici and Mayer
concluded that "structure-emphasizing techniques are effective because they
demonstrate to students that a reliance on surface features does not work" (p.
157).
Example-Problem Pairs
   In classrooms, problem-solving lessons in physics, as in other sciences and in
mathematics, typically include both worked examples and practice problems for
students to solve. Indeed, research suggests that some students rely heavily on
examples during problem solving (Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser, 1989).
As a result, examples and practice problems are often explicitly paired, and
experimental tests have often followed this paradigm (Cooper & Sweller, 1987;
Sweller & Cooper, 1985; Ward & Sweller, 1990), Following Bruner's (1966)
and Glaser's (1976) call for future research on instructional sequencing, one
may question this design assumption, even if it makes intuitive sense. Should
examples and practice be paired?
   In a recent study, Trafton and Reiser (1993) tested the pairing of examples
and practice, using a set of practice and example problems created from a LISP
programming curriculum. The authors designed two treatments, alternating and
blocked: Participants in the alternating condition were exposed to six example-

194
                                                             Learning FromExamples
practice problem pairs, where each example was followed directly by a compa-
rable, but not identical (i.e., each had a different cover story), practice problem
(e.g., Example 1, Practice 1, Example 2, Practice 2 . . . . Example 6, Practice 6),
whereas participants in the blocked condition were exposed to the entire set of
six examples, followed by the entire set of six practice problems (e.g., Example
 1, Example 2 .... Example 6, Practice 1, Practice 2 .... Practice 6). Although the
items within each example-practice problem pair were similar, each of the six
pairs was designed to be conceptually distinct from the rest. The authors in-
cluded two dependent measures: time to solution and accuracy of solution on
three near-transfer problems. Trafton and Reiser found that, as predicted, partici-
pants in the alternating-example condition took less time and produced more
accurate solutions on the transfer posttest than their counterparts in the blocked-
example condition. These findings were viewed as consistent with a knowl-
edge-compilation model of learning, which suggests that examples must be
available in memory during problem solving. This differs from an example-
generalization model, which stipulates that problem-solving rules are acquired
while studying examples. Based on these findings, the authors asserted that "the
most efficient way to present material to acquire a skill is to present an example,
then a similar problem to solve immediately following" (Trafton & Reiser, 1993,
p. 1022).
Summao,: Inter-Example Lesson Design
   The conclusions from the research on inter-example variability in worked-
example lesson design can be summarized briefly: First, transfer is enhanced
when there are at least two examples presented for each type of problem taught.
Second, varying problem sub-types within an instructional sequence is benefi-
cial, but only if that lesson is designed using worked examples or another
format that minimizes cognitive load. Third, lessons involving multiple prob-
lem types should be written so that each problem type is represented by ex-
amples with a finite set of different cover stories and that this same set of cover
stories should be used across the various problem types. Finally, lessons that
pair each worked example with a practice problem and intersperse examples
throughout practice will produce better outcomes than lessons in which a blocked
series of examples is followed by a blocked series of practice problems.
        Interacting with the Learning Environment: Explanation Effects
   Whereas the two previous sections dealt exclusively with factors of example
and lesson design, we now examine the ways in which examples are used by the
problem solver, particularly the practice of explaining examples to one's self
and to others. Early research examining the effectiveness of worked examples
(e.g., Sweller & Cooper, 1985; Tarmizi & Sweller, 1988) tacitly assumed that
there were no individual differences in example processing style, thereby dis-
counting the possibility that some individuals may naturally employ more or
less effective methods of studying worked examples. Recently, a number of
studies have found that, in fact, individuals do differ in how they approach and
learn from examples (Chi, in press; Chi et al., 1989; Chi & Bassok, 1989; Chi &
VanLehn, 1991; Pirolli & Recker, 1994; Renkl, 1997b; VanLehn & Jones, 1993a,
1993b).
                                                                               195
Atkinson, Dero'. Renkl, and Wortham
    Chi and her colleagues (Chi et al., 1989) conducted the initial, and most
influential, study to date on how individuals differ in their example processing
and how this ultimately affects learning. Their research examined the way in
which physics-naive college students used worked examples while attempting
to master an elementary physics lesson. Although students were very dependent
on worked examples while studying, Chi and her colleagues noted that they
often failed to fully understand the problem-solving model illustrated by the
examples. As a result, students were unable to generalize from the examples to
problems that differed slightly from the examples themselves (e.g., Sweller &
Cooper, 1985). Chi et al. proposed that this lack of understanding on the part of
some learners might stem from the incompleteness of the examples. In particu-
lar, they suggested that some students are unable to process an unexplained
example effectively. Since, according to their analyses, most examples contain
insufficiently explained solution steps, they suggested that the burden of ex-
plaining the rationale of poorly elaborated solution steps falls on the learner
and that some learners might be better than others at providing the missing
explanations. In support of this assertion, Chi and her colleagues found that
learners employ qualitatively distinct strategies to offset the effect of poorly-
elaborated examples. In fact, the authors noticed that, upon discovering an
unexplained step, some learners temporarily suspended their examination of the
example in order to generate their own justification for the actions depicted in
the step. Chi and her colleagues labeled this the self-explanation effect. They
found that the students in their study who self-explained while studying ex-
amples appeared to learn more effectively (as demonstrated by their greater
success at subsequent problem solving) than those who did not exhibit this
behavior.
    Chiet al.'s (1989) examination of the self-explanation effect led to the dis-
covery of rather conspicuous differences between more successful and less suc-
cessful students. Based on the results from their study, Chi et al. proposed four
ways in which more successful students differed from less successful students in
terms of the self-explanation phenomenon. The more successful participants (1)
voiced a greater number of self-explanations during example studying, includ-
ing more self-explanations related to articulating the deep structure of the prob-
lem, (2) voiced more accurate self-monitoring statements during example study-
ing, (3) were less likely to refer back to the examples while problem solving,
and (4) used more focused references when they did choose to look back at the
examples during problem solving.
    A recent study by Renkl (1997b) examined qualitative differences among
college students' self-explanation characteristics and found that learners differ
substantially with respect to the quality of their self-explanations. Consistent
with Chi et al.'s (1989) research, the learners' performance appeared to be di-
rectly related to the qualitative nature of their self-explanation characteristics.
Renkl (1997b) discovered that the quality of the effective learners' self-expla-
nations could be attributed to how often they attempted to self-explain the deep
structure of the problems. He also found that learners showed a stable tendency
in their self-explanations that was independent of the specific examples at hand.
However, in a departure from Chi et al.'s (1989) initial concept of the self-

196
                                                           Learning FromExamples
explanation effect, Renkl (1997b) suggested that the overall quality of self-
explanations was not dependent upon the presence of all of the various, posi-
tive aspects of self-explanation, such as accurate self-monitoring and explica-
tion of a problem's deep structure. Instead, an effective learner may consis-
tently display only one positive self-explanation characteristic during studying,
for instance, explicating a problem's deep structure, while being relatively poor
on another characteristic, such as self-monitoring. Thus, a learner need not be
competent in all facets of self-explanation to be successful.
   In addition to his effort to examine self-explanation characteristics among
learners, Renkl (1997b) also sought to identify particular self-explanation
"styles" among the participants in his study based on an analysis of verbal data.
Four relatively discrete self-explanation styles, two associated with successful
problem solving and two associated with less success, emerged from a cluster
analysis of these data. Upon closer examination, Renki discovered that the
nature of the two clusters suggested that successful students could be labeled as
either anticipative reasoners or principle-based explainers. Anticipative
reasoners self-explained by anticipating or predicting the next step in an ex-
ample solution and then following up with a self-check in which they deter-
mined whether their predicted step matched the step displayed in the example.
In contrast, those learners Renkl described as principle-based explainers sought
to articulate the conceptual structure of the problem by self-explaining the
problem's subgoal (conceptual) structure and explicating the domain principles
on which the solutions were based. However, only a minority of students in
Renkl's study showed a successful style. As a result, Renkl characterized the
self-explanation style of most learners as passive or superficial, since they spent
very little time studying the examples, thus missing opportunities to self-ex-
plain.
Inducing Explanations in Example-Based Instruction
   The message from the self-explanation literature is clear: students who self-
explain tend to outperform students who do not. Furthermore, there are differ-
ent forms of self-explaining, and students often fail to self-explain successfully.
Given this, a number of approaches have been proposed for encouraging learn-
ers to self-explain while processing problems. These include fostering self-ex-
planations by structural manipulations, directly training in self-explanation,
and attempting to engender self-explanation activities through social incen-
tives. In the sections that follow, we examine each of these in turn.

Fostering Self-Explanations Through Structural Manipulations. To date, only
manipulations in the intra-example features of worked examples have been as-
sociated with improvements in students' self-explanations. In particular, research
has focused on three means of increasing self-explanations through structural
manipulations: identifying subgoals (Catrambone, 1996, 1998), using incom-
plete examples (Stark, 1999), and using an integrated example format to avoid
"split attention" (Mwangi & Sweller, 1998).
   As previously discussed, Catrambone's research has shown that labeling
subgoals in worked examples increases students' performance. With respect to

                                                                               197
Atkinson. Derr)'. Renkl, and Wortham
self-explanations, Catrambone's subgoal learning model (1998) assumes that a
label leads the learner to group a set of steps and then to try to self-explain the
reason those steps go together. In the optimal case, these self-explanation at-
tempts result in the formation of a goal that represents the purpose of the set of
steps. Although his initial work found indirect support for this supposition, for
instance, enhanced performance on outcome measures, in one of his more recent
studies Catrambone (1996) collected more direct support for the effect of labels
on self-explanations. In this work, he analyzed verbal protocol data collected
while his participants studied examples, observing (a) the point at which stu-
dents recognized that solution steps leading to subgoals represented a unit and
(b) their explanations for what the steps accomplished, to determine whether
labeling subgoals induces self-explanations. Catrambone found that subgoai
labeling actually improved self-explanations and, as a consequence, transfer
performance. In a recent study, Catrambone (1998) replicated these findings,
thus providing clear evidence that subgoal labeling has positive effects on self-
explanation.
    Following Renkl's work on anticipative reasoning (1997b), Stark (1999) as-
sumed that students who tried to anticipate problem steps would effectively
self-monitor their problem solving, guarding against "illusions of understand-
ing" that frequently occur (cf. Chi et al., 1989; Pirolli & Recker, 1994). To
"force" anticipation, Stark (1999) omitted text and inserted blanks into the
worked examples of Renkl (1997b). The learners' task was to try to name what
was missing. After attempting to fill in the blanks, the students received feed-
back on the correctness of their responses. Stark found that compared to study-
ing complete examples, incomplete examples fostered explanations and reduced
ineffective self-explanations, such as rereading or paraphrasing. As a conse-
quence, incomplete examples enhanced the transfer of learned solution meth-
ods. This result contrasts with observations by Paas (1992), who found no differ-
ences between incomplete and complete examples. However, the main purpose
of Paas's study was not to investigate the effects of complete versus incomplete
examples.
    Several studies by Sweller and colleagues have shown, as noted, that inte-
grated examples are more effective than examples in which the learner's atten-
tion must be directed to different information sources (split-source format).
Mwangi and Sweller (1998) sought to determine whether the advantage of an
integrated format is mediated by the quality of explanations. In two experi-
ments they analyzed student explanations as a function of integrated versus
split-source format. Students were instructed to pretend that they were explain-
ing the examples to another student. It is important to note, however, that,
compared to most other studies that have examined this issue, Mwangi and
Sweller employed a different conception of self-explanations. Their study as-
sessed self-explanations by having learners explain example solutions to an
imaginary student after initial example learning. Hence, this procedure did not
aflbrd study of spontaneous or concurrent self-explanations, but rather induced
students to make pretend explanations for somebody else. With this restriction
in mind, Mwangi and Sweller found that student explanations were different
depending on whether the student used a split-format or integrated example. For
instance, students had greater difficulty understanding split-source examples,

198
                                                           Learning FromExamples
and more often simply re-read them. When students did reread integrated ex-
amples, they tended to be more focused and more often linked the process to
justifying specific solution steps.

Training Self-Explanations. Since the publication of Chi et al.'s (1989) results
on the importance of self-explanations, several studies have been conducted in
which students were trained in self-explaining. For example, Chi, DeLeeuw,
Chiu, and LaVancher (1994) prompted self-explanations of learners reading a
text on the circulatory system. Even without extensive self-explanation train-
ing, students in the Chi et al. study who were prompted to self-explain while
reading the text achieved a deeper level of understanding of the circulatory
system--as assessed by a variety of measures, including the accuracy of their
mental models--than their peers who were not prompted to self-explain. Neuman
and Schwarz (1998) trained students in self-explanations in the context of prob-
lem solving. Although both studies successfully induced self-explanations, they
are not discussed here because they did not investigate learning from worked
examples.
    More important in this context is the study of Bielaczyc, Pirolli, and Brown
(1995), since worked examples were a significant part of their learning materials
(text and examples on LISP programming). In an experimental group, partici-
pants were explicitly trained in self-explaining. The training consisted of (a)
introducing and motivating self-explanations, (b) learning from a student model
on videotape, and (c) verifying the participants' ability to provide elaborated
self-explanations (Bielaczyc et al., 1995, p. 231). The control group learners
also received some training, such as the viewing of a student model, but this
intervention was more implicit--it did not, for instance, incorporate explicit
training in the application of self-explanation strategies. The explicit training
was substantially more effective than the implicit training in fostering self-
explanations in students' studying examples and text. Consequently, the learn-
ing outcomes (programming performance) were superior in the explicit-training
group.
    Two other studies on training students to self-explain provide data directly
related to learning from examples. Nathan, Mertz, and Ryan (1994) trained
learners to provide self-explanations while studying worked examples and while
solving corresponding problems. Although the details of the training were not
provided, the authors found that training self-explanations fostered learning
when an algebra story problem was studied, but not when an algebra manipula-
tion problem (solving for the unknown variable) was presented. Nathan et al.
concluded that self-explanations are effective when conceptually oriented ex-
amples are studied, if the examples illustrate domain principles. When worked
example instruction focuses primarily on procedures, learners have little to elabo-
rate. Thus, training students to elaborate under such conditions makes little
sense.
    Finally, a study by Renkl, Stark, Gruber, and Mandl (1998) provides empiri-
cal evidence of the trainability of self-explanations. The authors conducted an
experiment to test the effect of short self-explanation training, with special
emphasis on explicating goal-operator combinations, that is, explaining what
goals need to be met in problem solving and what actions are needed to reach
                                                                               199
Atkinson. Dero; Renkl, and Wortham
them. For learning materials, Renkl et al. used examples from the domain of
compound interest and real interest calculation. Half of the learners received a
short training session of about 15 minutes that included the following compo-
nents: (a) information on the importance of self-explanations, (b) modeling self-
explanations (one worked example), and (c) coached practice (another worked
example). Participants in the alternate condition received thinking-aloud train-
ing. After these interventions, all participants independently learned from worked
examples. The explicit-training intervention had a very strong effect on self-
explanation activities (effect size of about two standard deviations), and learn-
ing outcomes (assessed by performance on transfer problems) also reliably im-
proved. In the case of near transfer, Renkl et al. (1998) found an aptitude-
treatment interaction, where learners with low prior topic knowledge tended to
profit most from the training.

Use o f Social hlcentives. The results of the Renkl (1997b) study suggest that
most learners are passive or superficial self-explainers. One possible way to
change this situation is to assign a student to the role of explainer in coopera-
tive learning settings. Following this idea, Renkl (1995, 1997d) investigated
whether assigning students to the role of "teacher" fostered self-explanation
activities and learning outcomes. He predicted that a teaching expectancy mo-
tivates learners to thoroughly self-explain the worked examples in order to
prepare themselves ['or the later teaching demand. The learners in an experimen-
tal group were told to study worked examples so they could later explain the
solution rationale of similar examples to a co-learner. The participants in a
control group were told that they would have to work similar problems after
studying the examples. Prior to any teaching activity by the students and using
test problems of different transfer distance to the worked examples presented,
Renkl immediately assessed learning outcomes to determine the instructional
value of the experimental group's preparation for teaching. The results of this
experiment were surprising, as the teaching expectancy did not significantly
improve performance but instead appeared to hamper learning, partly because
of increased stress and reduced intrinsic motivation on the part of the students.
    Renkl (1996, 1997a, 1997d) then studied the effects of generating explana-
tions for someone else. For this purpose, he formed yoked pairs of participants.
After a preparatory individual learning phase, one partner (experimental group)
explained the solution rationale of examples to his or her partner (control group).
Again, the results were counter-intuitive. The demand to explain for a co-learner
actually increased explanation activities, but did not lead to better learning
results. Instead, the listeners tended to outperform the explainers. Post-hoc analy-
ses indicated that learners with little prior experience with tutoring tended to
perform poorly when cast in the role of teacher, while participants with some
tutoring experience learned as much as the listeners.
    In the final set of studies in this program, Renkl (1997c, 1997d, 1998) inves-
tigated the effects of sophisticated co-learner questions on explaining and learn-
ing. Renkl assumed that responding to questions would foster the learners'
construction of conceptual understandings of the problem and thereby enhance
transfer. To test this assumption, the participants in an experimental group ex-
plained the solution rationale of worked examples to a putative co-learner (con-

200
                                                           Learning FromExamples
federate), who asked "what if' questions. In the control group, the confederate
was more or less totally passive. Renkl found that the co-learner questions
fostered one type of explanations (elaborating the situation), but all other types
of explanations, principle-based explanations, for instance, were reduced. As a
consequence, the intervention appeared to impede intrinsically motivated learn-
ers, perhaps because the co-learner questions hampered their sophisticated spon-
taneous explanation activities. However, the outcomes for learners with low
intrinsic motivation, whose spontaneous explanation activities were very poor,
improved. Overall, Renkl found that co-learner questions raised the quality of
poorly motivated students' explanation activities to average levels.
   In sum, attempting to foster explanations through teaching appears to yield
disappointing results. These results are mirrored by a recent study conducted by
Mwangi and Sweller (1998), who also found that outcomes did not improve for
learners instructed to pretend that they were explaining examples to another
person. However, given the empirical evidence on the positive effects of ex-
plaining in cooperative arrangements (e.g., Webb, 1991), we should not con-
clude that explaining to others does not help when studying worked examples.
Additional analyses of Renkl's data (Renkl, 1997d) suggest that there were at
least two factors that moderated the effects of learning by teaching: prior tutor-
ing experience and prior content knowledge. Learners who are not familiar with
the role of an explainer (tutor) and for whom the learning materials are difficult
(those with low prior knowledge) are overwhelmed and stressed by the dual task
of teaching and learning. Unfortunately, we currently lack detailed knowledge
on factors that moderate the effectiveness of learning by teaching.
Summary: Explanation Effects With Worked Examples
    In conclusion, research on explanation effects suggests that self-explanations
are an important learning activity during the study of worked examples. Unfor-
tunately, the present research suggests that most learners self-explain in a pas-
sive or superficial way. Among the successful learners, there seem to be different
subgroups employing different self-explanations styles (anticipative reasoning
and principle-based explanations). Both of these styles can be fostered by in-
structional methods. Direct training appears to be effective, as are structural
manipulations of examples such as adding subgoai labels, utilizing an inte-
grated format, or using "incomplete" examples. Less promising are the data on
improving self-explaining (and problem solving) through setting social incen-
tives to explain, such as inducing students to prepare to tutor others. In particu-
lar, students who have no prior tutoring experience and who are novices within
the domain being tutored appear to experience stress and overload when asked
to provide instructional explanations.
    Worked Examples Research: Synthesis and Commentary on Future
                              Research

                       A Model for btstructional Design
   Early in this review we acknowledged that classrooms are situated within
social and cultural contexts that significantly shape the learning that occurs

                                                                               201
Atkinson, Derr),, Renkl, and Wortham
within them. Nevertheless, we argued for the importance and relevance of ex-
perimental findings, citing a substantial body of evidence that many successful
and thriving programs of classroom reform have built upon controlled research
grounded in cognitive science. The worked examples research reviewed, con-
ducted in both classrooms and in "laboratories" that simulated classroom in-
struction in relevant ways, represents an important example of a cognitively-
based educational research program that is relevant to practice in the sense
argued by John Bruer (1993). In confining our review to studies that met cred-
ibility standards for controlled, experimental research, we were able to draw
relatively strong inferences about important causal factors that are likely to
mediate the effectiveness of instructional examples used in actual classroom
settings.
    Our review was organized to emphasize a particular perspective regarding
three major categories of factors that influence learning from worked examples.
These categories of influence lead to principles and recommendations concern-
ing (I) how examples should be constructed, (2) how lessons that include ex-
amples should be designed, (3) how the thinking processes that students use
when studying examples can be fostered. We now propose a framework, shown
as Figure 2, for discussing what appear to be the important causal interrelation-
ships among these categories
    As depicted in Figure 2, we postulate that learning from worked examples
causes learners to develop knowledge structures representing important, early
foundations for understanding and using the domain ideas that are illustrated
and emphasized by the instructional examples provided. These representations
guide problem solving and they may be conceptualized as representing early
stages in domain schema development and in the acquisition of expertise in
accordance with Anderson's model of skills acquisition (e.g., Anderson et al.,
 1997). Through use and practice, these representations are expected to evolve
over time to produce the more sophisticated forms of knowledge that experts
use. Even after expertise is achieved, learners can benefit from study of ex-
amples representing the performance of other experts.
    The outcomes of example-based learning and their functionality are influ-
enced by the several sets of factors represented in Figure 2. One set of factors
pertains to the manner in which an example-based lesson is put together, and
the influence of these factors on learning outcomes is indicated in Figure 2 by
the arrow connecting box I (Lesson and Example Design) to box III (Learning
Outcomes).
    As indicated in box I, designers of example-based instruction must decide,
among other issues, how many examples to provide for each type of problem
presented. The number of examples that can be used for teaching a particular
idea may be constrained in practice by such issues as instructional time and
problem complexity, since teachers often cannot present many complex ex-
amples. Research by Reed and Bolstad (1991) indicates that one example may
be insufficient for helping a student induce a usable idea and that the incorpo-
ration of a second example illustrating the idea, especially one that is more
complex than the first, garners significant benefits for transfer performance. So,
"at least add a second example" appears to be a basic rule for worked-examples
instructional design.

202
       I. Lesson & Example Design

        l.a. Inter-Example Features
  • Multiple examples per problem type
  • Multiple forms per problem type
  • Surface features that encourage search
      for deep structure
  • Examples in proximity to matched prob-
                                                                                                            IlL Quality of Outcomes:
      lems
                                                                                                               Transfer Performance
                                                                                                          (e.g., early schemas and de-
                                                                                                          clarative knowledge struc-
                                                                                                          tures representing concepts
        l.b. Intra-Example Features                                                                       illustrated in examples)
                                                            !I. Quality of Students' Self
    • Integration of example parts
                                                                      Explanations
    • Use of multiple modalities (aural,
                                                           (e.g., covert and explicit
         visual, etc.)
                                                           statements about anticipated
    • Clarity of subgoal structure
                                                           next steps, the meaning and
    • Completeness/incompleteness of
                                                           principles behind a procedure)
         example


                                             7                          t
             IV. Situational Factors                      V. Personal Self-Explanation
         • Short training / prompting to                                 Style
              self explain examples                       (e.g., principle-based explainers,
         • (Social incentives to explain                  anticipative reasoners)
              examples)

Figure 2. Framework for discussing the causal interrelations among three major categoreis offactors influencing the learning from
 worked examples
Atkinson. Derr3; Renkl, and Wortham
    Other lesson-design factors also included in Figure 2 are the variability in
the types of problems used in a lesson, how to use surface features strategically
to emphasize deeper conceptual structure and how to intersperse and coordinate
examples with actual problem solving. Worked-examples lessons will promote
transfer if they include variability. This means that examples within lessons
should differ from each other in terms of their numerical values and form, as
opposed merely to their numerical values (Paas & Van Merrienboer, 1994),
However, if a teacher wants beginning students to notice that different structural
characteristics are associated with different problem types, these characteristics
can profitably be emphasized in the beginning by manipulating formats, such
as cover stories, across examples and between problem types (Quilici & Mayer,
 1996). In this case, similar problem types should all have different cover stories
since, according to Qulici and Mayer (1996), "when students see the same bat-
tery of cover stories used across problem types, they are more likely to notice
that surface features are insufficient to distinguish among problem types" (p.
 157). However, regardless of the number of problem types covered, the most
effective way of structuring a worked example lesson is to link each example
explicitly to its target practice problem (Trafton & Reiser, 1993), rather than to
present a block of different examples followed by massed practice in problem
solving.
    As indicated by box I.b of Figure 2, we also found that the structure or design
of the worked examples within lessons plays a critical role in learning. When
examples require students to reference and integrate multiple sources of infor-
mation, cognitive overload can occur. Sweller and his colleagues (Mousavi et
al., 1995: Tarmizi & Sweller, 1988; Ward & Sweller, 1990) call this the split-
attention effect and offer two suggestions for combating it. First, ensure that
examples are formatted so that information within the examples is physically
integrated. Next, whenever possible, simultaneously supplement examples with
aural explanations, particularly when providing information about an example
diagram. When example diagrams are complex, a method must be found to
direct students' attention to pertinent parts of the diagram as the aural informa-
tion is presented. Finally, Catrambone's research (1994a, 1994b, 1995a, 1995b,
 1996: Catrambone & Holyoak, 1990) indicates that worked examples should be
structured so that subgoals are emphasized by visually isolating them, by label-
ing them, or both.
    As indicated by the arrow from box I.b to box II in Figure 2, there is evidence
that the structure of worked examples enhances students' self-explanation be-
havior. Moreover, there is evidence that students' self-explanation behavior
during study in turn mediates learning, as indicated by the arrow from box II to
box III. However, it has not been determined that the effects of example struc-
ture on learning outcomes are fully mediated by self explanation. Hence, our
model also includes a direct arrow from the lesson and example features box
(box I) to the learning outcomes of box IIl. There is, of course, a strong possibil-
ity that other, up to now unidentified mechanisms, are involved in mediating
the effects of example structure.
    The research, and consequently the framework, also suggests that in addition
to example structure, situational factors, such as training and social incentives,
can foster self-explanations. Several studies have shown that self-explanations
can be influenced favorably by short training sessions. Since it is unrealistic to

204
                                                           Learning From Examples
 assume that short interventions have enduring effects on individuals' explana-
tion styles, short training sessions are viewed as situational factors that affect
immediate learning activities, but not stable personal characteristics. Unfortu-
nately, there is presently no self-explanation training designed to change per-
 sonal styles. Social incentives, such as preparing an explanation to tutor a part-
ner, are also considered situational factors that can engender self-explanation.
However, they do not necessarily enhance learning outcomes, as a number of
 studies have shown. Hence, Figure 2 places the phrase "social incentives" in
parentheses, indicating that further clarification is needed to determine which
social incentives lead to favorable outcomes and under what conditions. Given
findings from the worked examples literature that seem to contradict evidence
from the cooperative learning literature regarding the positive effects of being
an explainer, our principle here is unclear.
    The arrow drawn from box V to box II in Figure 2 represents the finding that
the number and quality of self-explanations associated with the personal self-
explanation style used by an individual while studying worked examples is
known to influence learning outcomes. Renkl (1997b) has shown that it is
reasonable to attribute specific self-explanation styles to individual learners.
This means that a person's actual self-explanations depend, among other things,
on his or her stable tendency to provide specific explanations.
    The model depicted in Figure 2 provides a useful framework for thinking
about worked-example design and for planning future research on basic cogni-
tive mechanisms and instructional interventions. For instance, the model does
not contain a link between inter-example features and quality of students' self-
explanations. This suggests that research has not yet uncovered the relationship
between quality of students' self-explanations and inter-example lesson fea-
tures, although it might in the future. Moreover, the model implies that a num-
ber of other unanswered questions remain, including (1) What are the specific
mechanisms that mediate the effects of lesson- and example-design features on
learning outcomes, (2) Are there mediating mechanisms other than self-explana-
tions that are responsible for the learning effects associated with the processing
of worked examples, (3) By which kind of training can personal self-explana-
tion styles be most effectively changed, and (4) Are there circumstances under
which certain types of social incentives can be used to foster self-explanations
and, in turn, learning outcomes?
                       Implications and New Directions
   To the extent that worked examples research has produced general principles
about how students learn through study of examples and related problem solv-
ing, the findings of this program may have implications for design of
constructivist learning environments in which students learn by solving com-
plex problems (e.g., Williams & Hmelo, 1998). For example, with the Problem-
Based Learning (PBL) instructional paradigm (e.g., Wilkerson & Gijselaers, 1996),
students learn subject matter as it is needed for solving real-world problems.
PBL problems are typically ill structured and complex, designed to mimic pro-
fessional practice and other real-life problem situations. Problems are often pre-
sented to students as cases, such as medical cases, and students are guided by a
tutor as they analyze cases and seek solutions, for example, diagnoses and

                                                                              205
Atkinsolz. Derr3; Renkl, and Wortham
treatments. Sometimes expert or student solutions to the same or similar prob-
lems are made available to students, either before, during, or after solving.
   The PBL approach is increasingly popular and frequently used in both pro-
fessional and K-16 education (Williams, 1992; Williams & Hmelo, 1998). Lead-
ing teachers and educational researchers advocate PBL as a method for helping
students acquire useful knowledge that will transfer into working and other real-
world contexts. Yet, PBL can be complex, difficult and time-consuming for
both students and teachers (e.g., Derry, Levin, Osana, Jones, & Peterson, in
submission), Principles derived from the worked-examples literature might be
applied to help improve PBL instructional design. The efficacy of those prin-
ciples for PBL could be evaluated through experimental research.
   For example, the Secondary Teacher Education Project (STEP) (http//
:www.wcer.wisc.edu/step) is a web-based instructional program under develop-
ment that employs video cases of real classroom practice to help secondary
education majors learn to reason about instructional design. Groups of students
are asked to study actual classroom cases and propose redesign solutions that
use concepts from a course in instructional psychology. Each case is linked to
one or more web pages discussing specific course concepts. Each case is also
associated with one or more expert analyses. How should these resources be
organized and used to produce the most effective instruction?
   The worked-examples literature suggests that students should study expert
case solutions before attempting similar case-redesign problems of their own.
Also, most guidelines derived from the worked-examples literature and shown
in Figure 2 can be applied to the PBL instructional model, as exemplified in
STEP, with only small translation. Our illustration follows.
                          Inter-Example Lesson Features
  Examples in proximit3, to matched problems. Each expert solution should be
    matched with similar case-based problems for students to solve; matched
    problems should be presented in close proximity to their matched expert
    solutions. In STEP, for example, if the student's task is to design an inquiry
    approach to teaching a science concept, this problem could be immedi-
    ately preceded by an expert example of an inquiry approach to teaching a
    similar science concept.
  Multiple exatnples per problem type. Students should experience a variety of
    different problem cases and example solutions for each to-be-learned con-
    cept. For example, instructional scaffblding is a to-be-learned concept
    within STEP, and so a variety of classroom learning problems in which
    scaflblding is part of the solution, and a variety of different approaches to
    providing instructional scaflblding, (for instance., through course structure,
    personal mentoring, etc.), are given.
  Sue'rice features that encourage search for deep structure. Students should
    examine each problem case from very different conceptual perspectives,
    solving the same problem using multiple solutions and different points of
    view. For example, in STEP, the same classroom case can legitimately be
    viewed as a problem of providing too little instructional scaffolding or,
    alternatively, as a problem of failing to gain and locus students' attention.

206
                                                         Learning FromExamples
                             Intra-Example Features
  Integrating example parts. To avoid split-attention effects in study of expert
    analyses, present case videos and expert case analyses in a single inte-
    grated package. In STEP, for instance, expert case analyses that were once
    presented as separate text that students could read after watching a video
    are now being redesigned as dynamic narratives incorporated directly into
    video cases.
  Use of multiple modalities. Present expert case analyses using simultaneous
    multiple modalities, such as aural explanation overlaid on video.
  Clari~ of subgoal structure. The expert case analysis should explicitly label,
    segregate, or otherwise specify the individual concepts underlying the case.
    For example, as an expert discusses concepts such as scaffolding or atten-
    tion in reference to a classroom video, the presentation must be designed to
    signal clearly, perhaps using arrows or other symbols, which specific ac-
    tions within the video match the target concepts being discussed.
  Completeness/incompleteness of example. Incomplete expert case analyses
    may be preferable because they require students to make inferences and fill
    in gaps, fostering self-explanation during study. In STEP, for example, stu-
    dents are sometimes asked to complete or adapt unfinished expert solu-
    tions to classroom problems.
                              Situational Factors
  Social incentives to explain examples. Asking students to prepare case analy-
    ses for the purpose of instructing others will not foster productive self-
    explanation behavior during study of worked examples. However, group
    discussions of expert analyses may help foster self-explanatory processing
    and hence improve learning. Accordingly, the STEP program has adopted a
    small-group case discussion format.
  Short training~prompting to self explain examples. Training and prompting
    students to self-explain during study of expert analyses and problem solv-
    ing will improve transfer learning. In STEP, for example, self-explanation
    behavior is modeled and encouraged by trained small-group facilitators.
   The example above illustrates how principles derived from the worked ex-
amples literature are supporting design and study of a complex form of prob-
lem-based learning in one instructional research project.
                            Concluding Comments
    Educational researchers today are asking how to create and study authentic
learning environments, classroom communities that employ complex, real-world
problems as instructional contexts. Well-known modern approaches to authen-
tic instruction in classrooms include anchored instruction, apprenticeship mod-
els, case-based instruction, and problem-based learning, among others (e.g.,
Williams, 1992). Because the worked examples research has been conducted
largely in controlled settings with relatively simple problems, it would be easy
for researchers who support authentic instructional paradigms to overlook or
ignore findings from this literature. Yet the worked examples research is one of
several strong cognitive-theoretical programs of experimental study yielding
principles of potentially great importance for helping educators foster learning

                                                                            207
Atkinson, Derr3; Renkl, and Wortham
through problem solving and study of examples of good problem solving.
Whether or not the application of these principles can significantly enhance
student learning in authentic problem-solving contexts, as it has in laboratory
ones, is a question that worked examples researchers should now attempt to
answer in partnership with classroom researchers and practitioners.
   The current focus on crafting and sustaining authentic learning environ-
ments evolved, in part, as a result of a common goal, shared by many educators,
of promoting students' abilities to engage in adaptive, flexible transfer. Critics
of worked examples instruction may raise the issue that worked examples are
unable to assist classroom communities in achieving this goal since their effec-
tiveness is limited to training students to use a particular procedure under nar-
rowly defined conditions. As a result, critics may claim that students exposed to
worked examples are not able to solve problems with solutions that deviate
from those illustrated in the examples, can not clearly recognize appropriate
instances in which procedures can be applied, and have difficulty solving prob-
lems for which they have no worked examples. These limitations, critics might
argue, call into question whether examples are appropriate for classroom in-
struction since they do not promote anything beyond superficial learning to
imitate procedures, which is exactly the type of learning that precludes flexible
adaptation to novel problems and contexts.
    The current review suggests, however, that examples can in fact help educa-
tors achieve the goal of fostering adaptive, flexible transfer among learners. For
instance, the research on inter-example features of lesson design point to the
importance of providing a wide range of examples (and having students emu-
late examples) that illustrate multiple strategies and approaches to similar prob-
lems, which should help foster broad transfer and "cognitive flexibility" (Spiro,
Feltovich, Jacobson, & Coulson, 1991). In addition, the lesson design strategies
discussed in this review have tremendous potential to make expert thinking, not
just procedures, visible and accessible to students, expert thinking that illus-
trates and makes visible flexible, creative problem solving and appropriate be-
liefs about mathematics as well as metacognitive monitoring. To achieve this
goal, it is possible to structure an example within a computer-based multimedia
environment to illustrate mathematics as a thinking process by depicting an
expert thinking aloud as he/she endeavors to solve the problem at hand. This
type of example would resemble Schoenfeld's (1987) suggested method of teach-
ing mathematics, in which the instruction illustrates mathematical problem solv-
ing as thinking and struggling, not simply as a "neat" procedural process. A
prototype of this example is currently being used in a computer-based instruc-
tional environment called Tutorials in Problem Solving (TIPS). TiPS incorpo-
rates a graphic problem-solving interface and dynamically-represented worked
examples that include both aural and visual modeling of expert problem solv-
ing processes. These features are designed to help promote students' abilities to
model and reason flexibly about a wide variety of story problems (Derry,
Wortham, Webb, & Jiang, 1996; Derry et al., 1994; http://www.wcer/wisc/edu/
tips/). Thus, one way in which example-based instruction has the potential to
overcome the perception that they provide exceedingly procedurally oriented
instruction is by illustrating an expert's underlying thinking process as she or
he engage in problem solving.

208
                                                           Learning FromExamples
   This review also provides some empirical evidence that calls into question
each of the specific limitations about example-based instruction that might be
raised by critics. As noted earlier, Catrambone and Holyoak's (1990) research
documented that learners are capable of solving problems whose procedures
deviate from those illustrated in the worked examples. According to research
conducted by Quilici and Mayer (1996), learners can recognize appropriate
instances when procedures depicted in examples should be applied. Finally, the
results of Reed and Bolstad's (1991) study suggest that learners are proficient at
solving problems for which they are not provided worked examples. In sum, the
current review suggests that worked examples, at least on a fundamental level,
promote the type of flexible transfer that educators are seeking in their class-
room.
   Much work remains to be done, particularly as the new instructional para-
digms develop further and as new computer and video technologies enhance
our capabilities for dynamically representing realistic problem situations and
their underlying concepts in computer-based worked examples using visualiza-
tion and modeling. We expect that, as researchers develop new problem forms
and worked examples, the questions addressed in this review will be modified
as follows: How can examples of authentic problem solving be designed to
reduce cognitive load and promote acquisition of transferable cognitive struc-
tures? When and how should authentic examples be introduced into learning
community activities? How can we design classroom discourse and direct in-
strnction to engender productive self-explaining of examples by learners? Our
review already points to some possible answers.
                              Acknowledgements
  This research was supported by the Office of Naval Research, Cognitive and
Neural Sciences Division, under Grant N0001495PR34F2 awarded to Sharon J.
Derry.
                                   References
Anderson, J. R., Fincham, J. M., & Douglass, S. (1997). The role of examples and
  rules in the acquisition of a cognitive skill. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
  ogy: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 932-945.
Bielaczyc, K., Pirolli, P. L., & Brown, A. L. (1995). Training in self-explanation
  and self-regulation strategies: Investigating the effects of knowledge acquisi-
  tion activities on problem solving. Cognition and Instruction, 13, 221-252.
Bourne, L. E., Goldstein, S., & Link, W. E. (1964). Concept learning as a function
  of availability of previously learned information. Journal of Experimental
  Psychology, 67, 439-448.
Bruer, J. T. (1993), Schools for thought: A science of learning in the classroom.
  Cambridge: MIT Press.
Brewer, W. F., & Nakamura, G. V. (1984). The nature and function of schemas. In
  R. S. Wyer & T, K. Srull (Eds.), Handbook of Social Cognition (pp. 119-160).
  Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bruner, J.S. (1966). Toward a theory of instruction. New York: W.W. Norton
Bruner, J. S., Goodnow, J., & Austin, G. (1956). A study of thinking. New York:
  Wiley.
Carroll, W. M. (1994). Using worked examples as an instructional support in the
  algebra classroom. Journal of Educational Psychology, 86, 360-367.

                                                                              209
Atkinson, Derry, Renkl, and Wortham
Catrambone, R. (1994a). The effects of labels in example on problem solving
   transfer. In A. Ram, & K. Eiselt (Eds.), Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual
   Conference of the Cognitive Science Socie O, (pp. 159-164). Hillsdale, NJ:
   Erlbaum,
Catrambone, R. (1994b). Improving examples to improve transfer to novel prob-
   lems. Memo O, & Cognition, 22, 606-615.
Catrambone, R. (1995a). Aiding subgoal learning: Effects on transfer. Journal of
   Educational Psychology, 87, 5-17.
Catrambone, R. (1995b). Effects of background on subgoal learning. In J. D.
   Moore & J. F. Lehman (Eds.), Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual Confer-
   ence of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 259-264). Hillsdale, N J: Erlbaum.
Catrambone, R. (1996). Generalizing solution procedures learned from examples.
   Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memoo,, and Cognition, 22,
    1020-1031.
Catrambone, R. (1998). The subgoal learning model: Creating better examples so
   that students can solve novel problems. Journal of Experimental P©,chology:
   General, 127, 355-376.
Catrambone, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1990). Learning and subgoals and methods for
   solving probability problems. Memory & Cognition, 18, 593-603.
Chase, W. G.. & Simon, H. A. (1973). The mind's eye in chess. In. W. G. Chase
   (Ed.), Visual information processing. New York: Academic Press.
Cbi, M. T. (in press). Self-explaining: The dual process of generating inferences
   and repairing mental models. In G. R. (Ed.), Advances in instructional psychol-
   ogy. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chi, M. T., & Bassok, M. (1989). Learning from examples via self-explanation.
   In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, atzd instruction: Essays in honor
   of Robert Glaser (pp. 251-282). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chi, M. T., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-
   explanations: How students study and use examples in learning to solve
   problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145-182.
Chi, M. T., de Leeuw, N,, Chiu, M. H., & La Vancher (1994). Eliciting self-
   explanations improves understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Chi, M. T., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation
   of physics problems by experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Chi, M. T., Glaser, R., & Rees, E. (1982). Expertise in problem solving. In R.
   Sternberg (Ed.), Advances in the po,chology of human intelligence (pp. 7-75).
   Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Chi, M. T., & VanLehn, K. A. (1991). The content of physics self-explanations.
   Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1, 69-106.
Cooper, G., & Sweller, J. (1987). Effects of schema acquisition and rule automa-
   tion on mathematical problem-solving transfer. Journal c( Educational Psy-
   chology, 79, 347-362.
Dewy, S. J., Wortham, D., Webb, D., & Jiang, N. ( 1996, April). Tutorials in problem
   solving (TIPS).: Toward a schema-based approach to instructional tool de-
   sign. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational
   Research Association, New York, NY.
Derry, S. J., Tookey, K., Smith, C., Ports, M. K., Wortham, D., W., & Michailidi,
   A. (1994). Psychological Joundations of the TiPS system: A handbook for
   O'stem 1.0 (Technical Report). Madison, WI: Wisconsin Center for Education
   Research.
Den-y, S. J., Levin, J. R., Osana, H. P., Jones, M S. & Peterson, M. (in submission),
   Fostering students' statistical and scientific thinking: Lessons learned from an
   innovative college course.

210
                                                            Learning From Examples
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction and analogical transfer.
   Cognitive Psychology, 15. 1-38.
Glaser, R. (1976). Components of a psychology of instruction: Toward a science
  of design. Review of Educational Research, 46,1-24.
Hinsley, D. A., Hayes, J. R., & Simon, H. A. (1977). From words to equations
   meaning and representation in algebra word problems. In M. A. Just & P. A.
   Carpenter (Eds.), Cognitive Processes in Comprehension (pp. 89-106). Hillsdale,
  N J: Erlbaum.
Jeung, H., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1997). The role of visual indicators in dual
  sensory mode instruction. Educational Psychology. 17, 329-433.
Mawer, R., & Sweller, J. (1982). The effects of subgoal density and location during
   problem solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
  and Cognition, 8, 252-259.
Mayer, R. E. (1997). Multimedia learning: Are we asking the right questions?
  Educational Psychologist, 32, 1-19.
Mayer, R. E., Moreno, R., Boire, M., & Vagge, S. (1999). Maximizing
   constructivist learning from multimedia communications by minimizing
   cognitive load. Journal of Educational Psychology, 91, 638-643.
McGilly, K. (Ed.) (1998). Classroom lessons: h~tegrating cognitive theo~, and
   classroom practice. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Mousavi, S. Y., Low, R., & Sweller, J. (1995). Reducing cognitive load by mixing
   auditory and visual presentation modes. Journal of Educational Psychology,
   87, 319-334.
Mwangi, W., & Sweller, J. (1998). Learning to solve compare word problems: The
   effect of example format and generating self-explanations. Cognition and
   Instruction, 16, 173-199.
Nathan, M. J., Mertz, K.,& Ryan, R. (1994). Learning though self explanations
   of mathematics examples: Effects of cognitive load. Paper presented at the
   Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New
   Orleans.
Neuman, Y., & Schwarz, B. (1998). Is self-explanation while solving problems
   helpful? The case of analogical problem solving. British Journal of Educa-
   tional Psychology, 68, 15-24.
Owen, E., & Sweller, J. (1985). What do students learn while solving mathematics
   problems? Journal of Educational Psychology, 77, 272-274.
Paas, F. (1992). Training strategies for attaining transfer of problem-solving skill
   in statistics: A cognitive load approach. Journal of Educational Psychology,
   84, 429-434.
Paas, F., & Van Merrienboer, J. (1994). Variability of worked examples and
   transfer of geometrical problem-solving skills: A cognitive-load approach.
   Journal of Educational Psychology, 86, 122-133.
Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, L. R. (1984). Reciprocal teaching and comprehension-
   fostering and monitoring activities. Cognition and htstruction, 1, 117-175.
Pirolli, P., & Recker, M. (1994). Learning strategies and transfer in the domain of
   programming. Cognition and Instruction, 12, 235-275.
Quilici, J. L., & Mayer, R. E. (1996). Role of examples in how students learn to
   categorize statistics word problems. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88,
   144-161.
Reed, S. K. (1993). A schema-based theory of transfer. In D. K. Detterman, & R.
   J. Sternberg (Eds.), Transfer on trial: Intelligence, cognition, and instruction
   (pp. 39-67). Norwood, New Jersey: Ablex.
Reed, S. K., & Bolstad, C. A. (1991). Use of examples and procedures in problem
   solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cogni-
   tion, 17, 753-766.
                                                                                211
Atkinson. Derrv, Renkl, and Worfluzm
Renkl. A. (1995). Learning for later teaching: An exploration of mediational links
   between teaching expectancy and learning results. Learning and Instruction,
   5. 21-36.
Renkl, A. (1996). Lernen durch Erkl~irenCoder besser doch durch Zuh6ren?
   [Learning by explaining, or better, by listening?]. Zeitschrift fiir
   Entwickhmgspsychologie und Piidagogische Psychologie, 28, 148-168.
Renkl, A. (1997a, March). Learning by explaining, or better, by listening? Paper
   presented at the ,,Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research
   Association" in Chicago.
Renkl, A. (1997b). Learning from worked-out examples: A study on individual
   differences. Cognitive Science, 21, 1-29.
Renkl, A. (1997c). Lernen durch Erklfiren: Was, wenn Riickfragen gestellt werden?
   [Learning by explaining: What if questions were asked?]. Zeitschrift fiir
   Piidagogische Psychologie, I 1, 41-5 I.
Renkl, A. (1997di. Lernen durch Lehren. Zentrale Wirkmechanismen beim
   kooperativen Lernen [Learning by teaching. Central mechanisms of coopera-
   tive learning]. Wiesbaden: DUV.
Renkl, A. (1998, April). Learning by explaining in cooperative arrangements:
   What ~1"questions were asked? Paper presented at the ,,Annual Meeting of the
   American Educational Research Association" in San Diego.
Renk], A., Atkinson, R. K., & Maier. U. H. (2000). From example study to problem
   solving: Smooth transitions help learning (Institute of Psychology Research
   Report No. 140). Freiberg, Germany: University of Freiberg.
Renkl, A., Stark, R., Gruber, H., & Mandl, H. (1998). Learning from worked-out
   examples: The effects of example variability and elicited self-explanations.
   Cotttemporarv Educational Psychology, 23, 90-108.
Ross, B. H. (1989). Remindings in learning and instruction. In S. Vosnaiadou &
   A. Rotony (Eds.), Similarity attd Analogical Reasoning (pp. 438-469). Cam-
   bridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Rumelhart, D. E., & Ortony, A. (1977). The representation of knowledge in
   memory. In R. C. Anderson, R. J. Spiro, & W. E. Montague (Eds.), Schooling
   and the acquisition o f knowledge. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schoenfeld, A. (1987). What's all the fuss about metacognition? In A. Schoenfeld
   (Ed.), Cognitive science and mathematics edacation (pp. 189-216). Mahwah,
   NJ: Erlbaum.
Scribner, S. (1984). Studying working intelligence. In M. Rogoff & J. Lave (Eds.),
   Everyday co enition: Its development in social context. (pp. 9-28). Cambridge,
   MA: Harvard University Press.
Shuell, T. J. (1996). The role of educational psychology in the preparation of
   teachers. Educational Psychologist, 31, 5-14.
Silver, E. A. (1979). Student perceptions of relatedness among mathematical
   verbal problems. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 10, 195-
   210.
Silver, E. A., & Marshall, S. P. (1990). Mathematical and scientific problem
   solving: Findings, issues and instructional implications. In B. F. Jones & C.
   Idol (Eds.), D#nensions ~[ thinking and cognitive instruction, Hillsdale, N J:
   Erlbaum.
Spiro, R. J., Fehovich, P. J., Coulson, R. L., & Anderson, D. K. (1989). Multiple
   analogies for complex concepts: Antidotes ['or analogy-induced misconcep-
   lions in advanced knowledge acquisition. In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.),
   Similarity and analogical reasoning (pp. 498-531). New York: Cambridge
   University Press.

212
                                                             Learning FromExamples
Spiro, R. J., Feltovich, P. J., Jacobson, M., & Coulson, R. L. (1991). Cogntive
  flexibility, constructivism and hypertext: Advanced knowledge acquisition in
   ill-structured domains. Educational Technology, 31, 24-33.
Stark, R. (1999). Lernen mit LOsungsbeispielen. Der Einflufl unvollstiindiger
  LOsungsschritte auf Beispielelaboration, Motivation und Lernerfolg [Learn-
   ing by worked-out examples. The impact of incomplete solution steps on
  example elaboration, motivation, and learning outcomes]. Bern, CH: Huber.
Sweller, J., & Cooper, G. A. (1985). The use of worked examples as a substitute
  for problem solving in learning algebra. Cognition and Instruction, 2, 59-89.
Sweller, J. & Levine, M. (1982). Effects of goal specificity on means-ends analysis
  and learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
  Cognition, 8, 463-474.
Sweller, J., Mawer, M., & Howe, W. (1982). Consequences of history-cued and
  means-end strategies in problem solving. American Journal of Psychology, 95,
  455-483.
Sweller, J., Mawer, M., & Ward, M. R. (1983). Development of expertise in
  mathematical problem solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
  112, 639-661.
Sweller, J., van Merrienboer, J. G., & Paas, F. G. (1998). Cognitive architecture and
  instructional design. Educational Psychology Review, 10, 251-296.
Tarmizi, R. A., & Sweller, J. (1988). Guidance during mathematical problem
  solving. Journal of Educational Psychology, 80, 424-436.
Tennyson, R. D., & Cocchiarella, M. J. (1986). An empirically based instructional
  design theory for teaching concepts. Review of Educational Research, 56, 40-
  71.
Tennyson, R. D., Wooley, F. R., & Merrill, M. D. (1972). Exemplar and nonexemplar
  variables which produce correct concept classification behavior and specified
  classification errors. Journal of Educational Psychology, 63, 144-152.
Trafton, J. G., & Reiser, B. J. (1993). The contributions of studying examples and
  solving problems to skill acquisition. In M. Poison (Ed.), Proceedings of the
  Fifteenth Annual Conference ~ the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1017-
   1022). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Van Engen, H. V. (1959). Twentieth century mathematics for the elementary
  school. The Arithmetic Teacher, 6, 71-76.
VanLehn, K. (1990). Problem solving and cognitive skill acquisition. In M. I.
  Posner (Ed.), Foundations of Cognitive Science (pp. 527-579). Cambridge,
  MA: MIT Press.
VanLehn, K., & Jones, R. M. (1993a). Better learners use analogical problem
  solving sparingly. In P. E. Utgoff (Ed.), Machine Learning: Proceedings of the
  Tenth Annual Conference (pp. 338-345). San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann
  Publishers.
VanLehn, K., & Jones, R. M. (1993b). What mediates the self-explanation effect?
  Knowledge gaps, schemas or analogies? In M. Poison (Ed.), Proceedings of the
  Fifteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1034-
   1039). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ward, M., & Sweller, J. (1990). Structuring effective worked examples. Cognition
  and Instruction, 7, 1-39.
Webb, N. M. (1991). Task-related verbal interaction and mathematics learning in
  small groups. Journal of Research in Mathematics Education, 22, 366-389.
Wilkerson, L. & Gijselaers, W. H. (1996). Bringing problem-based learning to
  higher education: Theory and practice. San Francisco: Jossey Bass.
                                                                                213
Atkinson, Derr3; Renkl, and Wortham
Williams, S. M. (1992). Putting case-cased instruction into context: Examples
   from legal and medical education. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2,
   367-427.
Williams, S. M & Hmelo, C. E. (Eds.). (1998). Special Issue: Learning through
   problem solving. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 7.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical Investigations. Translated by G.E.M.
   Anscombe. Oxford: Blackwell.
Zhu, X., & Simon, H. A. (1987). Leaning mathematics from examples and by
   doing. Cognition and Instruction, 4, 137-166.

                                   Authors
ROBERT K. ATKINSON is Assistant Professor in the Department of Counse-
  lor Education and Educational Psychology at the Mississippi State Univer-
  sity, Mail Stop 9727, Mississippi State, MS 39762;
  atkinson@ra.msstate.edu. His research interests include cognitive science
  applied to education and multi-media learning environments.
SHARON J. DERRY is a professor in the Department of Educational Psychology
  at the University of Wisconsin, 1025 West Johnson Street, Madison, WI 53706;
  sharond@wcer.wisc.edu. Her research interests include cognitive science ap-
  plied to education, instructional technology, and teacher education.
ALEXANDER RENKL is a professor in the Department of Educational Psychol-
  ogy at the Psychological Institute, Belfortstr. 16, D-79085 Freiburg, Germany;
  renkl@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de. His research interests include cognitive
  processes in learning and computer supported learning.
DONALD WORTHAM is the Executive Director of For-Credit Programs, 500
  Lake Crook Road, Suite 150, Deerfield, IL 60015-5609; wortham@unext.com.
  His research interests include distributed learning environments and problem-
  based learning.




214
