‎Khan Academy Kids App - App Store

Search

 Today 

 Games 

 Apps 

 Arcade 

Platform

iPhone

iPad

Mac

Vision

Watch

TV

Khan Academy Kids

Reading & Math Learning Games

Free

 Share 

131K Ratings

4.8

Awards

Editors’ Choice

Apps

Age Rating

4+

In-App Controls

Chart

#80

Education

Developer

Khan Academy

Language

EN

English

Size

207.6

MB

iPhone, iPad

5,000+ learning games, books, and videos for kids ages 2–8. Always 100% free, no ads, no subscriptions—just safe, joyful learning kids and parents love.

Make screen time more meaningful with Khan Academy Kids—the award-winning, educational app for kids ages 2–8. Packed with fun, standards-aligned reading games, math games, phonics lessons, and interactive storybooks, the app has helped over 21 million preschool and elementary students learn at home, at school, and on the go. Join Kodi the Bear and friends on exciting educational adventures that spark curiosity, build confidence, and inspire a lifelong love of learning. 

PLAY-BASED READING, MATH & MORE:
From ABC games and phonics practice to counting, addition, and shapes, kids can explore over 5,000 educational games and activities with Kodi’s friends:
• Ollo the Elephant – phonics and letter sounds
• Reya the Red Panda – storytime and writing
• Peck the Hummingbird – numbers and counting
• Sandy the Dingo – puzzles, memory, and problem-solving

AWARDS AND RECOGNITION:
With more than 180,000 5-star reviews, Khan Academy Kids has won the hearts of families and educators worldwide. 
• “Best kids app EVER”
• “It’s 100% free and my kids learn so much!”
• “If you’re looking for a HIGH quality app for your kids, this is it!”

Recognition includes:
• Common Sense Media – Top Rated Educational App
• Children’s Technology Review – Editor’s Choice
• Parents’ Choice – Gold Award Winner
• Apple App Store – Editor’s Choice

A LIBRARY OF STORYBOOKS AND VIDEOS:
• Discover hundreds of kids’ books and videos for preschool, kindergarten and early elementary.
• Explore animals, dinosaurs, science, and more with non-fiction books from National Geographic and Bellwether Media. 
• Choose “Read To Me” for read-aloud storybooks in English or Spanish. 
• Dance and sing-along with videos from Super Simple Songs! 

FROM PRESCHOOL TO 2ND GRADE:
Khan Academy Kids grows with your child, from age 2 through 8 and beyond:
• Preschool learning games build foundational reading, math, and life skills.
• Kindergarten activities cover phonics, sight words, writing, and early math.
• 1st and 2nd grade lessons strengthen reading comprehension, problem-solving, and confidence.

SAFE, TRUSTED, AND ALWAYS FREE:
Created in partnership with the Stanford Graduate School of Education by education experts, aligned with Head Start and Common Core Standards, COPPA-compliant, and 100% free—no ads, no subscriptions. Khan Academy is a nonprofit with the mission to provide a free, world-class education for anyone, anywhere.

LEARN ANYWHERE—AT HOME, AT SCHOOL, EVEN OFFLINE:
• At home: Khan Academy Kids is the perfect learning app for families at home. From sleepy mornings to road trips, kids and families love learning with Khan Kids. 
For homeschool: Families that homeschool also enjoy our standards-aligned, educational kids games and lessons for kids.
• At school: In-app Teacher Tools help preschool and elementary school teachers create assignments, track student progress, and make the most of small-group and whole-group learning.
• On the go: No wifi? No problem! Download books and games for learning on the go. Perfect for car trips, waiting rooms, or cozy mornings at home.

START YOUR LEARNING ADVENTURE TODAY
Download Khan Academy Kids and watch your child discover, play, and grow. 

JOIN OUR COMMUNITIES FOR FAMILIES AND TEACHERS
Follow @khankids on Instagram, TikTok, and YouTube. 

KHAN ACADEMY:
Khan Academy is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization with the mission to provide a free, world-class education to anyone, anywhere. Khan Academy Kids was created by early learning experts from Duck Duck Moose who created 22 preschool games and won 22 Parents’ Choice Awards, 19 Children’s Technology Review Awards and a KAPi award for Best Children’s App. Khan Academy Kids is 100% free with no ads or subscriptions.

more

Events

…

MAJOR UPDATE

Not-So-Spooky Halloween

Khan Academy Kids is dressed up for Halloween! Explore a festive new look and new activities, more giggles than frights.

Ratings & Reviews

4.8

out of 5

131K Ratings

 Editors’ Choice 

Khan Academy Kids teaches early literacy, language, math, and social and emotional skills throughout its more than 1,000 games, videos, and stories. The app integrates science lessons from National Geographic Young Explorer magazine, music from Super Simple Songs, and content from children’s nonfiction publisher Bellwether Media. 

 Editors’ Choice 

Khan Academy Kids teaches early literacy, language, math, and social and emotional skills throughout its more than 1,000 games, videos, and stories. The app integrates science lessons from National Geographic Young Explorer magazine, music from Super Simple Songs, and content from children’s nonfiction publisher Bellwether Media. 

Wow! Just what my kids needed!

01/27/2023

Triciaroseyrose

Kahn Academy Kids is the best educational kids app I have found for my kiddos. The lessons are fun and engages my kids making it exciting to learn. We now use this app daily as a supplement to what they are learning in school. I have a 3 and 6 year old and both of them have their own profile and things we are working on. My 6 year old is learning how to read and he loves reading the books on the app out loud to me. My 3 year old is learning her letter sounds and this app actually pronounces the letter sound correctly for her. Super impressed by that as I haven’t found that to be common practice with education all apps - even on leap frog academy. The app is very intuitive to use and easy for my kids. I appreciate this because I can leave them to work on it independently or work alongside them - whichever I choose. Again, this is hard to come by. I also love how they get still get challenged by the lessons and actually grow and learn without feeling left discouraged. It gently nudges them if they get something incorrect. The math portion is wonderful as well and something I will be exploring more of. We have only had the app a week and there is SO much we can use this for. I felt compelled to leave a review already for the amount we have already used and enjoyed Khan Academy. Download this without hesitation for your child. You won’t regret it.

Developer Response

We sincerely appreciate your encouraging review! So glad to hear how well Khan Kids is working out for your family. 

Wow! Just what my kids needed!

01/27/2023

Triciaroseyrose

Kahn Academy Kids is the best educational kids app I have found for my kiddos. The lessons are fun and engages my kids making it exciting to learn. We now use this app daily as a supplement to what they are learning in school. I have a 3 and 6 year old and both of them have their own profile and things we are working on. My 6 year old is learning how to read and he loves reading the books on the app out loud to me. My 3 year old is learning her letter sounds and this app actually pronounces the letter sound correctly for her. Super impressed by that as I haven’t found that to be common practice with education all apps - even on leap frog academy. The app is very intuitive to use and easy for my kids. I appreciate this because I can leave them to work on it independently or work alongside them - whichever I choose. Again, this is hard to come by. I also love how they get still get challenged by the lessons and actually grow and learn without feeling left discouraged. It gently nudges them if they get something incorrect. The math portion is wonderful as well and something I will be exploring more of. We have only had the app a week and there is SO much we can use this for. I felt compelled to leave a review already for the amount we have already used and enjoyed Khan Academy. Download this without hesitation for your child. You won’t regret it.

Developer Response

01/30/2023

We sincerely appreciate your encouraging review! So glad to hear how well Khan Kids is working out for your family. 

A+ app for kids!

01/01/2021

keeperofthecookies

My daughter(age 7) used Khan Academy in school prior to the 2020 pandemic. Our school district listed Khan Academy as a resource to use when schools began closing in March. We used it in addition to her other school work during that time. We decided to try this app for our son that is preschool age but needs just a little more time before introduction to a public setting and teachers; he’s our spirited one. Our son (age 4) LOVES this app, he willingly selects Khan Academy when we give him screen time. He actually stays engaged for long periods of time and has fun doing it. He uses the information learned from his lessons and applies it to his toys or in real life settings. He’s even begun to read short stories!! In conclusion, my personal opinion is that this app is amazing. If you have children that are already in school and need a little something to stay engaged; get this app. If you have a wild tornado child (our son) that has shown interest in learning but they are not quite ready to be put into a school setting; get this app. They go at their own pace and advance to the next subject after mastering the first. They also offer additional resources on the website for your kids, such as circle time videos, free printable worksheets. I wish more educational websites/apps worked like Khan Academy! Again, my own personal opinion and each family/child is different, but Khan Academy is a perfect fit for us.

Developer Response

It's exciting to hear that your son is beginning to read the short stories! Thank you so much for the review! If you have any questions or suggestions for the app, feel free to reach out to khankids@khanacademy.org. 

A+ app for kids!

01/01/2021

keeperofthecookies

My daughter(age 7) used Khan Academy in school prior to the 2020 pandemic. Our school district listed Khan Academy as a resource to use when schools began closing in March. We used it in addition to her other school work during that time. We decided to try this app for our son that is preschool age but needs just a little more time before introduction to a public setting and teachers; he’s our spirited one. Our son (age 4) LOVES this app, he willingly selects Khan Academy when we give him screen time. He actually stays engaged for long periods of time and has fun doing it. He uses the information learned from his lessons and applies it to his toys or in real life settings. He’s even begun to read short stories!! In conclusion, my personal opinion is that this app is amazing. If you have children that are already in school and need a little something to stay engaged; get this app. If you have a wild tornado child (our son) that has shown interest in learning but they are not quite ready to be put into a school setting; get this app. They go at their own pace and advance to the next subject after mastering the first. They also offer additional resources on the website for your kids, such as circle time videos, free printable worksheets. I wish more educational websites/apps worked like Khan Academy! Again, my own personal opinion and each family/child is different, but Khan Academy is a perfect fit for us.

Developer Response

01/04/2021

It's exciting to hear that your son is beginning to read the short stories! Thank you so much for the review! If you have any questions or suggestions for the app, feel free to reach out to khankids@khanacademy.org. 

The Absolute Best

01/30/2024

Zin468

I have used this app for years with all 3 of my kids. They all love collecting the prizes and exploring the library on there. It is EXCEPTIONAL quality and I am so grateful they keep this resource completely free. I have tried subscription based education programs similar to this. My kids liked Khan Academy better. It’s more engaging, has the same content quality and it is super cute too. You know how some of the educational stuff for young kids out there is just kinda.. cringy? Makes you scrunch up your face and you can’t look away?? Khan isn’t. That’s a nice bonus..I added my youngest on there probably around 18 months. His older siblings got screens, he wasn’t going to tolerate being left out. So might as well make it something productive, right? I was curious to see how it would make activities interactive for such a young age group. The lowest age group, I think, is designed for 2 years old. It was definitely just blindly poking every option on the screen at first, but now that he’s nearly 2 he can definitely get through the activities by himself much easier. My oldest doesn’t really use it anymore, but I credit this app for helping him learn to read. When he entered kindergarten, he was evaluated and found to be, at least, 2nd grade reading level.Thank you for creating this wonderful resource, Khan Academy. I am truly grateful.

Developer Response

It's so exciting to hear that Khan Kids helped your child learn to read. Thanks so much for your message. Our team was so happy to read your review!

The Absolute Best

01/30/2024

Zin468

I have used this app for years with all 3 of my kids. They all love collecting the prizes and exploring the library on there. It is EXCEPTIONAL quality and I am so grateful they keep this resource completely free. I have tried subscription based education programs similar to this. My kids liked Khan Academy better. It’s more engaging, has the same content quality and it is super cute too. You know how some of the educational stuff for young kids out there is just kinda.. cringy? Makes you scrunch up your face and you can’t look away?? Khan isn’t. That’s a nice bonus..I added my youngest on there probably around 18 months. His older siblings got screens, he wasn’t going to tolerate being left out. So might as well make it something productive, right? I was curious to see how it would make activities interactive for such a young age group. The lowest age group, I think, is designed for 2 years old. It was definitely just blindly poking every option on the screen at first, but now that he’s nearly 2 he can definitely get through the activities by himself much easier. My oldest doesn’t really use it anymore, but I credit this app for helping him learn to read. When he entered kindergarten, he was evaluated and found to be, at least, 2nd grade reading level.Thank you for creating this wonderful resource, Khan Academy. I am truly grateful.

Developer Response

02/02/2024

It's so exciting to hear that Khan Kids helped your child learn to read. Thanks so much for your message. Our team was so happy to read your review!

What’s New

Version History

Thanks for learning with us! This release includes app updates and performance improvements to keep your child's learning experience smooth and fun.

9.0.1

Jul 30

Thanks for learning with us! This release includes app updates and performance improvements to keep your child's learning experience smooth and fun.

9.0

Jul 27

Thanks for learning with us! This release includes app updates and performance improvements to keep your child's learning experience smooth and fun.

8.1.6

May 5

Happy Earth Day from Khan Academy Kids!

This Earth Day, we are bringing the wonder of our planet right to your child! For a limited time, explore a special collection of Earth Day content made just for little learners.

Limited-Time Videos
Watch fun, short videos that show kids how amazing our Earth really is. From busy animals to beautiful forests, your child will love learning about the world around them.

Coloring Pages
Download and print brand-new Earth Day coloring pages! Kids can color animals, plants, trees, and more — all while learning to love and care for our planet.

Special Book Collection
Curl up with a brand-new set of books all about Earth, nature, and animals. These stories help kids understand why our planet is so special and how they can help take care of it.

This content is only here for a limited time — jump in now so your child does not miss out!

8.1.5

Apr 9

Happy Earth Day from Khan Academy Kids!

This Earth Day, we are bringing the wonder of our planet right to your child! For a limited time, explore a special collection of Earth Day content made just for little learners.

Limited-Time Videos
Watch fun, short videos that show kids how amazing our Earth really is. From busy animals to beautiful forests, your child will love learning about the world around them.

Coloring Pages
Download and print brand-new Earth Day coloring pages! Kids can color animals, plants, trees, and more — all while learning to love and care for our planet.

Special Book Collection
Curl up with a brand-new set of books all about Earth, nature, and animals. These stories help kids understand why our planet is so special and how they can help take care of it.

This content is only here for a limited time — jump in now so your child does not miss out!

8.1.4

Apr 2

Celebrate National Reading Month with new ways to fall in love with reading!

Recommended Reads
Not sure what to read next? We asked Khan Academy team members to pick their favorite books in the app. Then we put them all in one easy collection: Recommended Reads.
Open it anytime to find a great book fast.

Book Basics (New video collection)
Reading gets easier when kids understand how books work. Our new Book Basics videos teach simple, useful skills—step by step.

Kids can learn about:
•Book Cover
•Parts of a Book
•How to Read a Book
•Ask While You Read
•Identifying Characters
•Reading Accuracy
•Illustrations
•Fiction & Nonfiction
•Story Structure

Update now and enjoy National Reading Month with Recommended Reads and Book Basics!

8.1.3

Mar 9

Celebrate friendship, kindness, and big winter dreams in our newest update!

New: Friendship and Love fun
• Seasonal activities that help kids practice kindness, sharing, and caring
• New books that celebrate friendship and love
• New coloring pages for sweet, creative fun

New: Winter Olympic Games book picks
• A curated shelf of books inspired by the upcoming Winter Olympic Games
• Cozy reads for kids who love big goals, teamwork, and winter sports

Plus: Improvements behind the scenes
• Updates to help the app run smoother and faster

Khan Academy Kids is 100% free, safe, and ad-free—screen time you can feel good about.

8.1.2

Feb 3

Winter has arrived in Khan Academy Kids! 

This update brings a winter theme featuring exclusive seasonal activities, songs, and books to celebrate the joy of learning all winter long. Kids can explore snowy adventures with Kodi and friends while building early math, reading, and social-emotional skills.

Prefer not to use the winter theme? You can turn it off anytime in the Parent or Teacher Settings.

Update now to explore our cozy new winter learning fun!

8.1.1

11/19/2025

Our Halloween update has arrived! Celebrate the season with spook-tacular festive artwork and activities for kids to enjoy.

• A Halloween-themed home screen featuring Kodi and friends in costume
• Themed books, videos, and songs about owls, pumpkins, spiders, and more
• Halloween-inspired lessons in Letters, Reading, Math, Logic+, and Create
• Coloring pages, matching games, and scene creation activities

Don’t celebrate Halloween? You can disable the theme in the Parent or Teacher Settings. 

Thanks for learning with us!

8.1

09/30/2025

In the latest update, we fixed some bugs and made some minor updates. Please update your app for the best learning experience.

If you have any feedback, please contact us at learn.khanacademy.org.

If you're enjoying Khan Academy Kids, please consider leaving us a rating or review! Happy learning!

8.0.1

08/27/2025

Join Kodi & friends for hands-on summer learning at Camp Khan Kids! This July, our free virtual summer camp will delight children ages 2–8 with creative, hands-on learning adventures. Explore weekly themes like arts & crafts, animals, friendship, and more. With easy-to-follow schedules, playful activities, and printable resources, families can enjoy enriching experiences right at home. Promote creativity, curiosity, and joyful learning with minimal prep. Make your child's summer playful, memorable, and educational!

8.0

07/01/2025

Ready, set, draw! Our latest update features a brand-new set of stylus-friendly drawing and tracing activities, perfect for little hands practicing fine motor skills and early writing. Whether kids are doodling a dinosaur or tracing their ABCs, Khan Academy Kids is here to help build their confidence one squiggle at a time. Update to the latest version to try them out today!

If you’re enjoying Khan Academy Kids, we’d love for you to leave us a review!

7.1

05/05/2025

Spring has arrived at the Kids' Club! Update Khan Academy Kids today for new Earth Day content including:
– Exciting books covering "Insects Up Close"
– Colorful videos from Super Simple Songs
– Nature-inspired coloring pages and stickers

7.0.6

04/01/2025

It's National Reading Month! Update Khan Academy Kids today to discover a brand new set of books about family, friendship & imagination.

7.0.5

03/11/2025

It's National Reading Month! Update Khan Academy Kids today to discover a brand new set of books about family, friendship, & imagination.

7.0.4

03/03/2025

Come celebrate Valentine's Day with Kindness Month at Khan Academy Kids. Discover new content all month long to help kids understand and share their feelings. The Khan Kids Library will feature:

- Books About Feelings that explore moments of friendship with fun characters 
- Fun-filled videos to help early learners tune into their feelings 
- Creative activities like Valentine's Day cards and coloring pages

7.0.3

01/31/2025

Winter has arrived at the Kids' Club! Update Khan Academy Kids today for new seasonal content including:
- Festive videos from Super Simple Songs
- Snowy math and reading activities
- Joyful coloring pages and fun stickers

7.0.2

12/02/2024

Halloween has arrived at the Kids' Club! Update Khan Academy Kids today for new seasonal content including:

- Spooky videos from Super Simple Songs
- Festive math and reading activities
- Bewitching coloring pages and fun stickers

7.0.1

10/02/2024

In the latest update, we fixed some bugs and made some minor updates. Please update your app for the best learning experience. 

If you have any feedback, please contact us at khankids@khanacademy.org.

7.0

07/29/2024

In the latest update, we fixed some bugs and made some minor updates. Please update your app for the best learning experience. 

If you have any feedback, please contact us at khankids@khanacademy.org.

If you're enjoying Khan Academy Kids, please consider leaving us a rating or review! Happy learning!

6.4

05/13/2024

In the latest update, we fixed some bugs and made some minor updates. Please update your app for the best learning experience. 

If you have any feedback, please contact us at khankids@khanacademy.org.

If you're enjoying Khan Academy Kids, please consider leaving us a rating or review! Happy learning!

6.3

05/08/2024

Spring has arrived at the Kids' Club! Update Khan Academy Kids today for new Earth Day content including:

- Exciting animal books on "Spotting Differences"
- Colorful videos from Super Simple Songs
- Nature-inspired coloring pages and stickers

6.2

04/01/2024

Let the reading adventure begin! March is National Reading Month, and we’re celebrating with NEW books in our library. 

These books are perfect for kids ages 2-8, with stunning illustrations and engaging storylines. As kids immerse themselves in these magical tales, they’ll learn valuable life lessons about responsibility, respect, overcoming challenges, navigating change, and so much more. 

Share the love of reading with your child (or your students) by downloading today!

6.1.4

03/03/2024

Let the reading adventure begin! March is National Reading Month, and we’re celebrating with NEW books in our library. 

These books are perfect for kids ages 2-8, with stunning illustrations and engaging storylines. As kids immerse themselves in these magical tales, they’ll learn valuable life lessons about responsibility, respect, overcoming challenges, navigating change, and so much more. 

Share the love of reading with your child (or your students) by downloading today!

6.1.3

02/29/2024

Celebrate Valentine's Day with Kindness Month at Khan Academy Kids! Discover new content all month long to help kids understand and share their feelings. The Khan Kids Library will feature:

-  Books About Feelings that explore moments of friendship with fun characters 
-  New mindfulness videos from Alo Yoga to help early learners tune into their feelings 
-  Creative activities like Valentine's Day cards and coloring pages

6.1.2

01/31/2024

Thanks for learning with us! This release includes app updates and performance improvements to keep your child's learning experience smooth and fun.

more

Version 9.0.1

Jul 30

App Privacy

App Privacy

The developer, 
Khan Academy
, indicated that the app’s privacy practices may include handling of data as described below. This information has not been verified by Apple. For more information, see the 

developer’s privacy policy 

.

To help you better understand the developer’s responses, see 

Privacy Definitions and Examples  
.

Privacy practices may vary, for example, based on the features you use or your age. 

Learn More  

Data Not Linked to You

The following data, which may be collected but is not linked to your identity, may be used for the following purposes:

Analytics

Identifiers

User ID
Device ID

Usage Data

Product Interaction

App Functionality

Contact Info

Email Address
Name

Usage Data

Product Interaction

Diagnostics

Performance Data

The developer, 
Khan Academy
, indicated that the app’s privacy practices may include handling of data as described below. For more information, see the 

developer’s privacy policy 

.

Data Not Linked to You

The following data may be collected but it is not linked to your identity:

 Contact Info 

 Identifiers 

 Usage Data 

 Diagnostics 

Privacy practices may vary, for example, based on the features you use or your age. 

Learn More  

Accessibility

The developer has not yet indicated which accessibility features this app supports. 

Learn More  

Information

Seller

Khan Academy

Size

207.6 MB

Category

Education

Compatibility

Requires iOS 12.0 or later.  

iPhone
Requires iOS 12.0 or later.

iPad
Requires iPadOS 12.0 or later.

iPod touch
Requires iOS 12.0 or later.

Languages

English

Age Rating

4+  

4+ 

Made for Ages 0–5
This app is rated 4+ with content restrictions.
Some content may be rated higher, and may therefore be restricted and managed by the developer through in-app controls.

Learn More  

In-App Controls
Parental Controls

Copyright

© 2018-2025 Khan Academy

Developer Website

Privacy Policy

Featured In

APPS WE LOVE

Inspire Early Learners

Thousands of free learning games, videos, and ebooks.

FOR KIDS

Make STEM Learning Fun

Give children a head start with these apps.

More by Khan Academy

View

Khan Academy

You can learn anything

You Might Also Like

View

Math Kids - Add,Subtract,Count

Kids Learn to Add & Subtract

View

Sight Words Reading Games ABC

Learning Game Word Flash Cards

View

Preschool & Kindergarten Games

Pre K ABC Learning for Kids

View

PBS KIDS Games

Fun & Safe Educational Play

View

Starfall ABCs

Learn-to-Read Series, Step 1

View

ABC Kids - Tracing & Phonics

Learn ABCs, Tracing & Phonics

View

Hungry Caterpillar Play School

Montessori Preschool Learning

View

Starfall

PreK to 5th Reading & Math

View

Learn to Read - Reading.com

Phonics & Reading App for Kids

View

Learning games for toddlers.

Kids apps childrens girls boys

United States

Español (México)

العربية

Русский

简体中文

Français (France)

한국어

Português (Brazil)

Tiếng Việt

繁體中文 (台灣)

Select a country or region

Africa, Middle East, and India

See All 

Algeria

Angola

Armenia

Azerbaijan

Bahrain

Benin

Botswana

Burkina Faso

Cameroun

Cape Verde

Chad

Côte d’Ivoire

Congo, The Democratic Republic Of The

Egypt

Eswatini

Gabon

Gambia

Ghana

Guinea-Bissau

India

Iraq

Israel

Jordan

Kenya

Kuwait

Lebanon

Liberia

Libya

Madagascar

Malawi

Mali

Mauritania

Mauritius

Morocco

Mozambique

Namibia

Niger (English)

Nigeria

Oman

Qatar

Congo, Republic of

Rwanda

São Tomé and Príncipe

Saudi Arabia

Senegal

Seychelles

Sierra Leone

South Africa

Sri Lanka

Tajikistan

Tanzania, United Republic Of

Tunisia

Turkmenistan

United Arab Emirates

Uganda

Yemen

Zambia

Zimbabwe

Asia Pacific

See All 

Afghanistan

Australia

Bhutan

Brunei Darussalam

Cambodia

中国大陆

Fiji

香港

Indonesia (English)

日本

Kazakhstan

대한민국

Kyrgyzstan

Lao People's Democratic Republic

澳門

Malaysia (English)

Maldives

Micronesia, Federated States of

Mongolia

Myanmar

Nauru

Nepal

New Zealand

Pakistan

Palau

Papua New Guinea

Philippines

Singapore

Solomon Islands

台灣

Thailand

Tonga

Turkmenistan

Uzbekistan

Vanuatu

Vietnam

Europe

See All 

Albania

Armenia

Österreich

Belarus

Belgium

Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bulgaria

Croatia

Cyprus

Czechia

Denmark

Estonia

Finland

France (Français)

Georgia

Deutschland

Greece

Hungary

Iceland

Ireland

Italia

Kosovo

Latvia

Lithuania

Luxembourg (English)

Malta

Moldova, Republic Of

Montenegro

Nederland

North Macedonia

Norway

Poland

Portugal (Português)

Romania

Россия

Serbia

Slovakia

Slovenia

España

Sverige

Schweiz

Türkiye (English)

Ukraine

United Kingdom

Latin America and the Caribbean

See All 

Anguilla

Antigua and Barbuda

Argentina (Español)

Bahamas

Barbados

Belize

Bermuda

Bolivia (Español)

Brasil

Virgin Islands, British

Cayman Islands

Chile (Español)

Colombia (Español)

Costa Rica (Español)

Dominica

República Dominicana

Ecuador (Español)

El Salvador (Español)

Grenada

Guatemala (Español)

Guyana

Honduras (Español)

Jamaica

México

Montserrat

Nicaragua (Español)

Panamá

Paraguay (Español)

Perú

St. Kitts and Nevis

Saint Lucia

St. Vincent and The Grenadines

Suriname

Trinidad and Tobago

Turks and Caicos

Uruguay (English)

Venezuela (Español)

The United States and Canada

See All 

Canada (English)

Canada (Français)

United States

Estados Unidos (Español México)

الولايات المتحدة

США

美国 (简体中文)

États-Unis (Français France)

미국

Estados Unidos (Português Brasil)

Hoa Kỳ

美國 (繁體中文台灣)

Copyright © 2026

Apple Inc.

All rights reserved.

Internet Service Terms

App Store & Privacy

Cookie Warning

Support