Smartick | Online Learning Method For Kids

Pricing

Team

Resources 

Blog

Data 

Skills

Try 7 days free

Login

Pricing

Team

Resources

Blog

Data 

Skills

Login

Try 7 days free

Smartick Goes

Beyond

        the Classroom.

CODING

MATHEMATICS

        We help children become more confident in mathematics through daily practice.

                Ages 4 to 14

Try 7 days free

                    Join thousands of families in 190 countries who trust Smartick

4.4

More than 15,000 ratings on the App Store and Google Play

Introducing the Smartick Method

The story behind the project

            Over a decade ago, a team of parents, mathematicians, and educators identified a gap in the traditional math teaching methods.

Read more

                They recognized that these methods were not enabling children to achieve their full potential. Instead of succumbing to frustration, they conceived the Smartick Method, with the vision of empowering every child to excel in math and beyond.

            True learning goes beyond merely finding solutions; it's about comprehending the processes and logic underlying each problem. The team emphasized the importance of allowing each student to progress at their own pace and in line with their ability, thereby preventing demotivation.

            Smartick was founded with the singular aim of assisting children in achieving their utmost potential by providing a distinct, personalized curriculum designed for each student's unique requirements.

Smartick Step by Step

                First 2-3 Sessions

                During the first few sessions, children undergo a level assessment to determine their starting point.

                3rd Session Onwards

                Thanks to Smartick’s Artificial Intelligence-based program, a personalized study plan is created to cater to the needs of each student.

                Daily

                A new 15-min session is generated each day, encouraging kids to maintain a constant and exciting learning routine.

                Skills for Life

                Through daily practice, children are able to build positive study habits that will last a lifetime.

Smartick Programs 

MATHEMATICS

                    One Problem, 
Multiple Solutions

                    Problem solving involves being able to analyze, deduce and defend our assertions, in order to find a
                    fully comprehensible solution.

                    We combine multiple methodologies to encourage children to think and ponder before providing an
                    answer to a problem.

CODING

                    Training Children in the Language of the 
Future

                    Programming is an increasingly essential skill. With Smartick, children learn the basics through an engaging and user-friendly interface. It's hands down the most popular session among our students.

Register for free

            Endorsed by Leading Experts

                        “I'm particularly excited about Smartick because it reflects everything we have been researching about education in mathematics.”

Lori Breslow, PhD

Professor at MIT

(Massachusetts Institute of Technology) 

                        “Smartick allows each student to progress at the speed that they should be progressing at.”

 Barbara Oakley, PhD

Professor at Oakland University

NY-Times bestseller and creator of the most popular online course: Learning How to Learn.

Watch interview

                        “Smartick is changing the world of math with a new and fun approach to math education powered by Artificial Intelligence and personalized learning.”

Jöel Le Bon, PhD

Professor at Johns Hopkins University

Register for free

FAQ

Legal Notice

Terms of Service

Privacy Policy and Cookies

[email protected]

FOLLOW US:

US

                © Wed Sep 30 08:13:17 CEST 2026 Smartick.

                All Rights Reserved.

×