July 2021




Pathways: How
digital design puts
children at risk
                                                                             2




Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk

We are grateful for the financial support of all our funders, particularly
Wellspring Philanthropic Fund and Pointline Foundation who made this
research possible.

Copyright © 5Rights Foundation 2021
All rights reserved. No part of this production may be reproduced, copied
or transmitted without written permission from the authors.

5Rights Foundation
Charity number: 1178581
Scottish charity number: SC049882
Company number: 11271356

www.5rightsfoundation.com
3   PATHWAYS: HOW DIGITAL DESIGN PUTS CHILDREN AT RISK




    About 5Rights Foundation
    5Rights develops new policy, creates innovative frameworks, develops technical
    standards, publishes research, challenges received narratives and ensures that
    children’s rights and needs are recognised and prioritised in the digital world. While
    5Rights works exclusively on behalf of and with children and young people under 18,
    our solutions and strategies are relevant to many other communities.

    Our focus is on implementable change and our work is cited and used widely around
    the world. We work with governments, inter-governmental institutions, professional
    associations, academics, businesses and children, so that digital products and services
    can impact positively on the lived experiences of young people.
                                                                                           4




Preface
Bad actors and bad content online command our attention. While they should and must
be addressed, there is another aspect of the online world that gets limited attention:
design. The impact of digital design urgently requires greater public understanding and
regulatory focus.

Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk offers the opportunity for both.

The Pathways report is the outcome of a research project undertaken by Revealing
Reality on behalf of 5Rights Foundation. It examines how design choices embedded in
digital products impact the lives of children. Through interviews with digital designers
and children, and through innovative research using avatars,1 it lays bare how the
commercial objectives of digital companies translate into design features that impact
on children.

The results are alarming and upsetting.

The interviews with design professionals reveal the commercial objectives that put
innovators under pressure to produce features that maximise time spent, maximise
reach and maximise activity. These features shape children’s behaviour. They make it
hard for children to put down their devices (“I kept turning it off and then going back
and still using it” – Lara, 13). They push network growth to the extent that children find
themselves introduced to inappropriate adults, often with provocative or sexual content
(“Old men and that sort of thing” – James, 14). And they encourage children to post,
share and enhance to such a degree that many children feel that their ‘real selves’ are
inadequate (“All my photos have filters…they make you look prettier” – Carrie, 17).

The designers explain that “companies make their money from attention. Reducing
attention will reduce revenue.” As one of them ruefully offered: “There are no safety
standards – there is no ethics board in the digital space.” The digital services that
feature in the Pathways report, and the bulk of those that are likely to be accessed by
children, are not deliberately designed to put children at risk, but what this research
makes clear is that the risks they pose are not accidental. These are not ‘bugs’ but
features.

The digital world is entirely man- and woman-made, engineered and for the most part,
privately owned. Every part of it is built by a series of conscious choices to determine
one outcome over another. The unavoidable conclusion of the Pathways report is that
the choices these designers make are harming children. Children are trapped in highly
automated systems that maximise attention, maximise spread and maximise




1   An online proxy for a real child, see page 67
5   PATHWAYS: HOW DIGITAL DESIGN PUTS CHILDREN AT RISK




    interaction at any cost, even when the user is a child. A child who merely ‘hovers’ over a
    video is inundated with more of the same; who clicks on a dieting tip, by the end of the
    week, is recommended bodies so unachievable that they distort any sense of what a
    body should look like; and having told their true age, however young, is offered content
    and experiences that in almost any other context would be illegal.

    Most perturbing are the automated pathways, optimised for commercial goals, that lead
    to graphic images of self-harm, extreme diets, pornography, extremist content and
    introductions to adult strangers, all ubiquitous in many places and spaces that children
    inhabit – ranked, recommended and promoted to them at industrial scale.

    It is true that the more interest a child shows in particular content or activity, the more
    they are given, and in that sense, they are a participant in their digital diet. It is also true
    that no child is the same. Some have more resilience than others, and the
    circumstances and support available to help them to navigate childhood vary. But no
    connected child is exempt from the demands of the digital world and no child can be
    supervised 24/7. In all other settings, we offer children commonly agreed protections. A
    publican cannot serve a child a pint, a retailer may not sell them a knife, a cinema may
    not allow them to view an R18 film, a parent cannot deny them an education, and a
    drug company cannot give them an adult dose of medicine. These protections do not
    only apply when harm is proven, but in anticipation of the risks associated with their
    age and evolving capacity. These protections are hardwired into our legal system, our
    treaty obligations, and our culture. Everywhere but the digital world.

    What the Pathways report highlights is a profound carelessness and disregard for
    children, embedded in the features, products, and services – the norms – of the digital
    world.

    5Rights commissioned this research before the pandemic, and as such it pre-dates the
    publication of the draft Online Safety Bill, but its findings could not be more relevant.
    The most recent Ofcom Online Nation survey shows an increasing number of children
    are spending an increasing amount of time online at an increasingly young age.2 And
    the recent Ofsted review of sexual abuse in schools and colleges reveals the
    eyewatering scale of sexual harassment among pupils.3 Pathways goes some way to
    explaining the toxic nature of the digital world, which, algorithm by algorithm,
    optimisation goal by optimisation goal, deliberately shapes children’s behaviour. Bad
    actors and bad content are given prevalence and power by systems optimised for
    attention, reach and interaction.

    Perhaps the most startling image of the report (found on page 85) is a screenshot in
    which it is clearly visible that a ‘child’ avatar is being ‘targeted’ with adverts for
    Nintendo Switch, a sweet shop and teen tampons– and at the same time pro-suicide



    2   https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0013/220414/online-nation-2021-report.pdf
    3   https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/review-of-sexual-abuse-in-schools-and-colleges
                                                                                             6




material (“It is easy to end it all”). How on earth is that right? How on earth is that legal?
A 13-year-old, known to be 13, not offered a helpline, but enabled to access content
and activity in which self-harm and suicide is valorised. One kid, one screenshot? No.
On the same page, you can see a child avatar registered as a 15-year-old, targeted by a
Home Office advert with an anti-child abuse campaign – and at the same time being
offered contact with, and content from, adults in a pornographic pose. In both
scenarios, the account was registered as a child. The company monetised that child
account, but still they recommended, ranked, rated or offered up material that in many
cases broke their own terms and, in every case, should not have been offered to a user
registered as a child.

The 5Rights response to Revealing Reality’s research can be found in an Executive
Summary and in 11 recommendations. They are practical in nature and anticipate
working with stakeholders across government and industry to supercharge changes in
culture, design and regulation. The Executive Summary makes for sombre reading, but I
implore those with responsibilities in this area to read the full detail of the research, to
better understand the design features that put children at risk, and the opportunity to
reverse these risks by introducing mandatory child risk assessment and standards of
safety, by design and default.

The Pathways research also serves as a lament for all the missed opportunities.
Looking after children, whether mitigating risk, designing for their capacity and age, or
upholding their rights, is not optional – it is a price of doing business. Commercial goals
must be considered only after children’s needs, rights, and safety has been secured.
Anything else is a tragic failure of political and corporate will.

The research was conducted after a literature review undertaken by Professor Julia
Davidson OBE of the Institute for Connected Communities at the University of East
London. Our thanks go to her for her work in formulating the research project. Heartfelt
thanks also go to the Revealing Reality team for undertaking such a challenging project,
and to the 5Rights team for their unwavering commitment to children. But our biggest
thanks, once again, are to the children who share their online lives with us so
generously. I urge all readers to hear their voices, and to commit to every one of this
report’s recommendations.

Baroness Beeban Kidron
Chair, 5Rights Foundation
7   PATHWAYS: HOW DIGITAL DESIGN PUTS CHILDREN AT RISK




    Executive Summary

    The aim of this research project was to understand how the design of digital products
    and services shape the experiences and behaviours of children and young people.
    Conducted in three parts – interviews with designers, interviews with children and
    testing with avatars – the research revealed the following:

    •   Designers are tasked with optimising products and services for three primary
        purposes, all geared towards revenue generation:

                o   To maximise time spent on the service, capturing as much of a user’s
                    attention as possible.

                o   To maximise reach and draw as many people into their product as
                    possible.

                o   To maximise activity by encouraging as much content generation and
                    interaction as possible.

    •   Design features that fulfil these objectives (extending use, building networks and
        increasing engagement) are seen across digital products and services, but for
        children, they are most prevalent in social media and games, in the form of:

                o   Push notifications

                o   Endless scrolling feeds

                o   Quantifying and displaying popularity

                o   Making it easy to share

                o   In-app or in-game purchases

                o   Making it easy to connect, with friend or follower suggestions

    •   The designers interviewed were uncomfortable with the solely commercial intent
        of the companies they worked for but felt that change would only come if
        commercial goals specifically required them to design for the safety and wellbeing
        of children. Some acknowledged that the ‘products’ they were designing were bad
        for children, but they repeatedly expressed the need for change ‘from the top’.

    •   The concerns of children about their online experiences reflected these design
        strategies, including:

                o   Spending too much time online

                o   Being contacted by adult strangers

                o   Feeling pressure to behave in ways that gain attention and
                    validation (reach)

                o   Feeling pressure to be ‘visible’ and active online
                                                                                                                  8




               o    Enhancing their appearance through image alteration

•   Many of the children that feature in the report received unsolicited sexual
    content from adults within hours of being online.

•   The children expressed the view that the digital world is one that ‘their’ adults do
    not understand. They are clear that a less toxic, demanding and adult digital world
    would suit them better, but are worried that if they ‘switch off’, they may be
    excluded. The design strategies of the report describe how the fear of being left out
    is engineered into the system.

•   Children are often reluctant to say what they see and do online. 4 They
    underestimate the time they spend online; some are embarrassed or worried about
    revealing what happens online; some feel guilty, many worry that they will be
    punished by having their phone taken away; many are not aware of the outcomes of
    their online use and most are not aware of how their behaviour or content is spread,
    used and consumed online.

•   To validate their experiences, the researchers tested using avatars as proxies for
    the children (see methodology section on page 68). The avatars were set up with
    the correct age of the individual child on which their profiles were based, and all the
    avatars were above the minimum age of use for each service.

•   The avatars were set up to recreate the profiles of real children, but to protect their
    experiences and the experiences of others, the avatars did not interact with other
    children. For this reason, the findings from the avatar research are emblematic of
    the child’s experience, rather than an exact recreation. However, the outcomes
    across the entire group of children show similar patterns. These patterns mirror
    the recorded experiences of children more broadly, including those captured
    in recent reports from Ofcom5 and Ofsted.6

•   Despite being registered as the age of a child, and being targeted with child-
    focused, age-appropriate advertising, the avatars were served up sexual content,
    requests from adults for contact, self-harm and suicide material, crash diets and
    other extreme body image content.

•   The types of recommended content varied between the different genders of the
    avatars. All of the ‘boy’ profiles were contacted by adults clearly offering
    pornography. The ‘girls’ were offered commercial products and services including
    music accounts and clothing brands.

•   The avatars were registered as 13+, and the children we spoke to also met the
    minimum age of use for the services. However, 42% of children under 13 are also




4 https://www.revealingreality.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/CML-wave-5-report.pdf
5 https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0013/220414/online-nation-2021-report.pdf
6 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/review-of-sexual-abuse-in-schools-and-colleges/review-of-sexual-abuse-

in-schools-and-colleges
9   PATHWAYS: HOW DIGITAL DESIGN PUTS CHILDREN AT RISK




        using these services,7 being guided to the same experiences and served up the
        same content.


    The digital world has been allowed to be risky by design. It is fixated on outcomes that
    do not account for the presence of children. It does not abide by the rights, rules or
    respect that children are due. 98% of UK children over the age of 10 are online 8 and the
    features and commercial drivers that put children at risk are normalised, unfettered
    and happening at scale. But just as the risk is designed in, so too can it be designed
    out.




    7 https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0025/217825/children-and-parents-media-use-and-attitudes-
    report-2020-21.pdf
    8.https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/bulletins/childrensonlinebehaviourinenglan

    dandwales/yearendingmarch2020
                                                                                         10




Recommendations
This report is published as the Age Appropriate Design Code comes into effect (2
September 2021), as the new regulations for video-sharing platforms take root and
crucially, as the Draft Online Safety Bill is published. Together, they provide a unique
opportunity to embed protections for children into the products and services of the
digital world. Revealing Reality’s research shows a status quo in which children are
being exploited and put at risk, and an unacceptable number are coming to harm. It is
unlikely that the Online Safety Bill will be introduced in Parliament before 2022, and the
Codes of Practice setting out how services are to comply with the Bill will be produced
only after it receives Royal Assent. This means that the effects of the Bill are unlikely to
be delivered to children for another three or four years. For this reason, our
recommendations are divided between the Online Safety Bill and other actions that the
government must take immediately. A child, whether aged 8, 12 or 15, does not have
three or four years to wait. They need protection now.

These recommendations relate specifically and only to the issues that the Pathways
report outlines.


Online Safety Bill
 1. The aspects of design that create risk for children are not deliberately designed to
    hurt them but are nonetheless ‘intentional’, designed to fulfil the commercial goals
    of a product or service. The most common response we hear from engineers and
    designers is ‘I never thought about it like that’. While the current list of duties set
    out in the draft Online Safety Bill is welcome, they do not add up to a ‘duty of care.’
    An overarching duty to care would drive companies to consider the impact of their
    services on children, in advance and in the round. This principle is used in many
    other sectors and settings, including health and safety and consumer protection. A
    duty of care would futureproof the Bill and ensure that the regulator is not always
    behind the curve. The Online Safety Bill must include an overarching duty of
    care for services ‘likely to be accessed by children.’

 2. Principles of safety by design should underpin all the duties and requirements for
    products and services likely to be accessed by children, with compliance assessed
    against enforceable minimum standards. Many of the design features brought to
    light in this report are entirely unnecessary for the delivery of a service. For
    example, hiding visible popularity metrics such as ‘likes’ would not stop a child
    engaging with content they enjoy. Preventing the micro-targeting of children would
    not stop contextual advertising for health campaigns or child-focused products. A
    mandatory safety by design framework would usher in a new world of digital
    design, set out clear expectations and ensure that services, both big and small,
    understand that some design choices are simply not appropriate in relation to
    children. The requirement to make services safer by design must be set out on
11   PATHWAYS: HOW DIGITAL DESIGN PUTS CHILDREN AT RISK




            the face of the Bill, and Ofcom must be charged with creating a safety by design
            framework that is mandatory and enforceable across the sector.

         3. Throughout the Bill, there are concessions for small businesses in the name of
            innovation and reducing the regulatory burden. However, small is not necessarily
            safe. Often, small services do not have sufficient moderation or reporting
            processes in place and have become a haven for those who spread mis and
            disinformation.9 They should not be held to lesser regulatory standards than
            services with more users or a larger workforce. Small companies should be given
            the support they need to comply with regulation, not permission to harm. Children
            have a right to be protected wherever they are online and the Bill must be
            applicable to all services likely to be accessed by or impact on children.

         4. The risk assessment requirements in the Bill are focused on risks associated with
            content and the actions of other users, rather than the system design that puts
            children at risk. As currently drafted, there is no clear requirement for service
            providers to act on and mitigate the risks identified in their risk assessment
            process. They can be punished for failing to undertake or hand over their risk
            assessment, but there is no clarity or accountability for the scope, quality or speed
            of mitigation for the risks the assessment reveals. The Bill must set out the scope
            and minimum standards for a Child Risk Assessment framework, requiring all
            services likely to be accessed by or impact on children to mitigate the risks
            identified and to disable features until mitigation measures have been
            undertaken to the satisfaction of the regulator. Minimum standards for a Child
            Risk Assessment framework must address content, contact, conduct and
            contract as well as cross-cutting risks to children,10 and set out categories of
            risk that it seeks to prevent.

         5. The current definition of harm in the Bill is focused on harmful content. This
            misses a full range of potential risk and harm from contact, conduct and contract
            risks. The concentration on harmful content opens up the government to
            accusations of curtailing free speech, rather than taking the more neutral and
            holistic approach to tackle risk at a systemic level. The digital products and



     9 For example, the video-sharing platform Clapper, which has under 500,000 downloads on the Google Play store.
     Despite a minimum user age of 17, the service’s weak age assurance means a child can log in to Clapper via their
     Google account, even if they are underage. The service is known to harbour misinformation and its terms of service
     explicitly state that it “cannot ensure the prompt removal of objectionable material as it is transmitted or after it has
     been posted.”
     10 Livingstone, S & Stoilova, M (2021). The 4Cs: Classifying Online Risk to Children (CO:RE Short Report Series on Key

     Topics). Hamburg: Leibniz-Institut für Medienforschung | Hans-Bredow-Institut (HBI); CO:RE - Children Online: Research
     and Evidence: https://doi.org/10.21241/ssoar.71817
     10 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/review-of-sexual-abuse-in-schools-and-colleges/review-of-sexual-abuse-

     in-schools-and-colleges
     10 There are other mentions in reference to certain offences in the Schedules.

     10https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/985033/Draft_

     Online_Safety_Bill_Bookmarked.pdf#page=123
     10 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/601965568fa8f53fbe1a0795/_Proposed_Negative_SI__-

     _Audiovisual_Media_Services__Amendment__Regulations_2021_SI.pdf
     10 https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/key-data-protection-themes/age-appropriate-design-a-

     code-of-practice-for-online-services/3-age-appropriate-application/
     10 The Age Assurance (Minimum Standards) Bill:
                                                                                                                 12




        services in scope of the Bill are consumer-facing products. Ensuring that they do
        not present a risk to children is simply a price of doing business, like in any other
        sector. The Bill must establish a definition of harm that includes risks created
        by the design and operation of products and service. The definition should
        ensure that a child’s right to freedom of association, expression and thought
        are upheld.

     6. Children are exposed to pornography online and introduced to both real (human)
        and automated (bots that may appear human) purveyors of pornography at an
        industrial scale. The impact of pornography on children is widely reported and can
        be seen in our schools and colleges.11 Parents, teachers and children themselves
        are united in their call to prevent companies from exposing children to
        pornography, and the government has made repeated promises to do this that
        have not been fulfilled. The word ‘pornography’ is mentioned only once in the
        Bill,12 in reference to the repeal of the unimplemented part 3 of the Digital
        Economy Act,13 which would have brought in mandatory age verification for
        commercial pornography companies. The Bill must include a definition of adult
        content and a specific requirement for services hosting pornography, whether
        user-generated or commercially provided, to have age assurance measures in
        place. It must also include a specific requirement for companies not to offer
        (recommend, rank or provide) adult content to under 18s. Age assurance systems
        introduced to prevent access to adult content must be privacy-preserving and
        secure.

     7. The research shows a multiplicity of features that put children at risk. While a
        mandatory risk assessment, mitigation and review process, alongside a robust and
        enforceable safety by design regime, would bring about many necessary
        protections and design changes, there is considerable confusion about the scope,
        status and enforceability of the Codes of Practice and guidance that Ofcom is
        charged to produce, and the right of the Secretary of State to change or revoke
        them. The Bill must require Ofcom to produce a statutory Code of Practice for
        child online safety. This should set out the requirements for companies
        assessing and mitigating risks to children and set minimum standards for safety
        by design, including age-appropriate published terms, age assurance, and
        moderation, reporting and redress systems. These standards must be
        mandatory and enforceable, and independent of political considerations.

     8. Companies have known for many years that their services are risky by design and
        put children in harm’s way. They are aware that they disseminate content that
        children should not be offered and that the features they optimise for commercial
        ends also put children at risk. Whether hiding child sexual abuse material behind



11 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/review-of-sexual-abuse-in-schools-and-colleges/review-of-sexual-abuse-
in-schools-and-colleges
12 There are other mentions in reference to certain offences in the Schedules.

13https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/985033/Draft_

Online_Safety_Bill_Bookmarked.pdf#page=123
13   PATHWAYS: HOW DIGITAL DESIGN PUTS CHILDREN AT RISK




             end-to-end encryption, introducing children to adult strangers, making a child’s
             real-time location visible, targeting children with scams, misrepresenting the age
             restrictions on apps, games and content, or using only ‘tick box’ age assurance,
             the sector has failed to act. The Bill must introduce company director liability,
             not only for information offences, but for failure to fulfil a duty of care and all
             other duties, relating to products and services likely to be accessed by children.


     Immediate action in advance of the Online Safety
     Bill
     The current timetable of the Online Safety Bill, and the deferral of responsibility to
     Ofcom to work out detailed Codes of Practice, mean that many of the advances offered
     by the Bill will not be felt by children for several years. Children cannot wait. Already we
     have legislation that requires14 or will shortly require age assurance,15 but no formal
     minimum standards these systems must meet, or what a ‘risk-based’ approach means
     in practice, nor clarity on how it will be enforced.

     There are few parents who would not be alarmed by the findings in Ofsted’s recent
     report or concerned for a teenager who may be propositioned to provide naked or
     sexual pictures as many as eleven times per evening, for a pre-teen consuming adult
     material or being nudged to participate in a culture that is normalising these demands.
     Taking action now offers them their childhood back.


          9. The government should introduce minimum standards for age assurance,
             including a requirement for Ofcom to set out an explicit risk-based framework that
             would allow businesses to understand what level of assurance is required in
             different scenarios. The private member’s bill recently introduced by 5Rights Chair
             Baroness Kidron,16 could be usefully co-opted and amended for this purpose. The
             widespread adoption of privacy-preserving age assurance is widely supported by
             age verification providers, children’s charities, parents and the tech sector itself. It
             could be rolled into the Online Safety Bill at the time of Royal Assent, but would
             allow Ofcom to develop a standard that could be operational within months. A
             standards-based age assurance scheme not only offers safety but also opportunity
             for children to be given different information, privileges and access to age-
             appropriate services. The government must urgently introduce standards for age
             assurance with a risk framework, to drive commercial innovation and sector-
             wide use of privacy-preserving age assurance solutions.




     14 https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/601965568fa8f53fbe1a0795/_Proposed_Negative_SI__-
     _Audiovisual_Media_Services__Amendment__Regulations_2021_SI.pdf
     15 https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/key-data-protection-themes/age-appropriate-design-a-

     code-of-practice-for-online-services/3-age-appropriate-application/
     16 The Age Assurance (Minimum Standards) Bill: https://bills.parliament.uk/bills/2879
                                                                                         14




 10. The government should ask Ofcom to develop a Code of Practice for child online
     safety concurrently with the passage of the Bill. This would allow co-development
     with Parliament, public consultation and stakeholder engagement, while ensuring
     that by the time of Royal Assent, the code for online safety for children is ready to
     be published. While this may not be the usual practice, this pace is required to
     keep up with the tech sector which works swiftly and iteratively and will advance
     the protection of children by many months and very likely some years. The sector
     is clear that a single code of practice, from an independent regulator, would be
     preferable to a number of separate interventions on the face of the Bill. The
     government should formally write to Ofcom, the named regulator, to ask that
     they start work on a Children’s Online Safety Code of Practice with the aim of
     having it ready by or before Royal Assent.

 11. The Age Appropriate Design Code comes into effect on 2 September 2021. This
     has the potential, if robustly enforced, to address some (not all) of the issues
     children face online. The government review of representative action provisions
     under Section 198 of the Data Protection Act (2018) concluded that in spite of
     considerable support, charities and third sector organisations that protect children
     would not be permitted to take action on their behalf against companies in breach
     of the Age Appropriate Design Code. Nonetheless, robust enforcement of the AADC
     would provide evidence for and experience of regulating the sector and offer
     immediate benefits to children. The government should resource and support the
     ICO to ensure that the Age Appropriate Design Code is fully complied with.

We heard again and again from designers that they could design for safety, but their
companies require them to design to maximise time spent, maximise reach and
maximise activity. They want and need leadership. The UK is singularly well placed to be
a leader in child online safety. The government should position the UK loudly and
proudly as a global leader in child online safety and, as we do so, ensure that its actions
meet its rhetoric.
Pathways:
How digital design
puts children at risk
Contents
Introduction 17                            Children 48
  About Revealing Reality 18               How children experience digital products
  Definitions 19                             Who did we meet?     50
Research summary       20                    Children are growing up within the choice
  Research objective    20                   architecture of social media 51

  Research approach     20                   How does social media encourage
                                             children to spend time online? 51
                                             How does social media encourage
Designers 23                                 children to build networks online? 53

How designers create digital products        How does social media encourage children
                                             to create and share content? 56
  The business model drives design 24
                                             Some children feel social media has
  Social media relies on its own             negatively impacted them 62
  audience to contribute 24
                                             Summary    65
  Designers create a choice architecture
  that shapes behaviour 25
  Designers encourage behaviour by         Avatars 66
  making it appealing and easy 26
                                           How digital products treat ‘child’ profiles
  Success is measured by time,
  reach and activity 28                      What are social media ‘avatars’   67

  These KPIs are used to continue            Method overview     68
  developing digital products 29             Avatars were proactively contacted
  Designers have concerns about the          by strangers 70
  impact of their products on users 31       Avatars were quickly recommended more
                                             of whatever they engaged with 73
                                             Avatars were easily able to search for and
Deconstructing design 33                     access content relating to eating disorders,
How digital products use design              suicide, self-harm, and sexual images 80
to shape behaviour                           Summary    86
How design strategies work together
to shape behaviour 46
  Summary 47
                                           Conclusions 87


                                           Design strategies in the
                                           digital world 90


                                           Interview sample 101
Introduction
Skip to:     Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design               Children        Avatars   Conclusions




About Revealing Reality

Revealing Reality is an independent social research agency, working with
regulators, government and charities to provide independent and rigorous
insight into young people’s experiences online.

Studying how the digital world is shaping people’s lives is something we do
every day. We’ve tracked how children use social media and the impact it
has on them for the past seven years as part of Ofcom’s Children’s Media
Lives1 research, and we’ve conducted some of the most detailed qualitative
behavioural research on digital behaviours,2 observing how people really
use digital products, services and technology.

We have been thinking for a long time about how design shapes behaviour
– across technology, gambling, financial products, the health service, and
more. Behaviour change techniques are at play in almost every interaction
we have with the world around us, and analysing who is making decisions
about design, and why, is central for making people happier, healthier, and
more empowered.

We were excited by the opportunity to conduct this work with 5Rights, to
bring this thinking together with their drive for achieving impactful policy
change, to improve the lives of children.




1    Ofcom – Children’s Media Lives Wave 6: https://www.revealingreality.co.uk/wp-content/
     uploads/2020/02/cml-year-6-findings.pdf
2    Revealing Reality – Through the Looking Glass: https://www.revealingreality.co.uk/wp-
     content/uploads/2019/06/Through-the-Looking-Glass_Revealing-Reality.pdf



18               Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                                Introduction
Skip to:     Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design    Children        Avatars   Conclusions




Definitions

Digital services – any product or service that is delivered via a digital
interface such as a smartphone, laptop or games console. This includes
digital apps, websites and online games, including (but not exclusively)
social media products and services.

Social media – a subcategory of digital services that enable the creation and
sharing of digital content via virtual communities or networks.

Examples of social media products and services that are referenced in this
report include: TikTok, Instagram, Snapchat, Facebook, Twitter, Discord,
Twitch, Yubo, YouTube, Omegle.

Features – for the purposes of this report we refer to ‘features’ of digital
services when we are talking about individual components, capabilities
or user interface design that offer specific functionality for the user of that
digital service. Examples might include ‘search’, ‘commenting’, ‘posting’.
Features may also include elements of the design that are less visible
or self-evident to users, including algorithm-driven content selection or
recommendations.

Designers – in the tech industry there are a wide range of job roles and
professions that all contribute to the creation of digital services – from
product managers to behavioural psychologists, who might not all be
involved in ‘design’ in its literal meaning. However, for the purposes of this
report we use the catch-all term ‘designers’ to refer to any professional who
is working on and contributing to the creation of digital services.

Children and young people – a child is any person under the age of 18.3
The children and young people referenced throughout this report are the
sample of 21 respondents that took part in the qualitative interviews, who
ranged in age from 12 to 18.

Digital products and services are commonly used by children from a very
young age: 82% of children aged 3–4 ‘went online’ during 2020 and 42%
of children between age 5 and 12 have used social media,4 although social
media companies specify a minimum age limit of 13 or older.

Avatars – we use the term ‘avatars’ to describe a component of the research
methodology where we set up social media profiles that replicate some of
the behaviours of real children to observe what happens to those profiles.
Avatars were used as ‘online proxies’ for real children who took part in this
research. For more detail on how we used these avatars, see page 66.




3    The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
4    Ofcom - Children and parents: media use and attitudes report, 2020/21



19               Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                     Introduction
Skip to:    Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design      Children        Avatars   Conclusions




Research summary

Research objective
To explore how the design of digital products, in particular social media,
shapes the experiences and behaviours of children.


Research approach

Digital products and services vary hugely, and each is constantly changing
and introducing new features. While many features are similar across
services, there is little transparency about how they function.

The children who use these digital products have different life experiences,
interests, and underlying vulnerabilities or influences on their lives; different
parents, friends, schools. We cannot entirely disentangle which factors are
driving differing outcomes.

With these challenges, we designed a research project to try to get as close
as possible to how social media products and services are shaping the
experiences and behaviours of children. We used three approaches:

     м Interviewing designers: How are these products and services
       designed? How are the people who build them making decisions
       about design? What are their objectives?

     м Interviewing children: What are their experiences online? How do
       they feel about what they see and do online?

     м Testing avatars: What happens when you replicate the experiences
       of children on social media using an ‘avatar’ profile: a proxy for a real
       child? What does social media show them? What behaviour does
       it enable?


Together, these three strands of research present a substantial evidence
base that begins to connect the dots between how digital products are
designed, and the impact they have on the lives of children.




20              Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                       Introduction
     Interviewing                                    Interviewing                             Testing
     designers                                       children                                 avatars


When interviewed, designers                        When we explored this                    When we used avatars –
of social media products and                       subject with children, they              ‘proxy’ children’s profiles
services told us:                                  told us:                                 set up on social media that
                                                                                            mirrored the age, interests,
š Designers work to the brief                      š Many spend more time online
                                                                                            and behaviour of real children
     they are given, and in many                      than they feel they should, and
                                                                                            – we saw that:
     businesses the success of a                      often find it hard to stop.
     feature or product is judged by                                                        š Child-aged avatars were
     its ability to shape the behaviour            š Social media is where all of their        exposed to significant quantities
     of users in line with business                   friends are and feels like one           of unsolicited contact from
     goals.                                           of their main windows into the           unknown adults, including the
                                                      world around them. To not go             sharing of sexual content.
š Designers of social media                           on social media would feel like
  products use a wide range of                        being excluded.                       š Avatars were quickly
  strategies to encourage users to:                                                            recommended and served more
  1) spend time on their product,                  š They experience validation                of whatever they seemingly
  2) attract more users, to 3)                        and affirmation online in the            ‘paid attention to’ (by clicking,
  interact and generate content.                      form of ‘likes‘, comments and            ‘liking’ or ‘following’). This
                                                      connections which shape what             applied to a range of content –
š The business model of social                        they do online in seeking them           such as celebrity or sport, but
  media products relies on their                      out.                                     also included content related to
  ability to shape behaviour                                                                   weight loss promotion, fitness,
  according to these three                         š Children seek out this affirmation        dieting and sexualised content.
  outcomes; if they fail to do so,                    and attention by creating mostly
  they will not generate revenue.                     visual content (e.g., selfies,        š When child-aged avatars
                                                      videos), sharing them as widely          searched for content (based
š There is a huge amount of                           as possible with online networks,        on the experiences of real
  expertise, power and data                           and by copying popular trends            children in the research) such as
  behind these design strategies                      and behaviours of others.                promotion of eating disorders or
  including mass A/B testing and                                                               self-harm, they were quickly able
  machine-learning algorithms,                     š Children had experienced                  to access this type of content,
  constantly optimising for                           unknown adults contacting                irrespective of their registered
  revenue generation against                          and connecting with them                 age. This content often
  these three outcomes.                               online, for some resulting in            contravened the social media
                                                      abusive encounters. Others had           company’s own community
š The functionality of these                          engaged with content relating to         guidelines.
  products can be deconstructed                       weight loss online, and for one
  to reveal the ‘design strategies’                   this ultimately led to seeing huge    š These same child-aged avatars
  used to shape behaviour – from                      quantities of content promoting          were served age-relevant
  refining what content users                         eating disorders.                        targeted advertising (e.g.,
  see to make it more and more                                                                 relating to toys, school or
  appealing, removing friction, to                 š Many children in this research            other products aimed at young
  promoting social interaction and                    blamed social media for                  people), while continuing to be
  encouraging content creation                        negative and challenging                 served sexual images, content
  through features like filters and                   experiences they had faced               promoting eating disorders
  editing tools.                                      growing up, surrounding body             or weight loss and self-harm,
                                                      image and relationships.                 despite social media companies
š Designers expressed concern                                                                  knowing that these accounts
  about the impact of their design                                                             were registered as children.
  process on users.




21              Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Introduction
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design    Children         Avatars    Conclusions




Social media is designed to shape behaviour, and children experience
pressure to behave a certain way on social media.




Business objectives                              Design strategies                 Outcomes for children

Social media companies want to                   Social media is designed          Children feel like they
maximise time on their product                   to engage users by making         spend too much time online
                                                 content more and more             and find it hard to stop
                                                 appealing, and reducing
                                                 friction in consumption


Social media companies                           Features are designed             Children have extensive
want to maximise reach                           to promote and extend             networks and connections
the of their product                             networks and connections,         online and to be offline
                                                 between peers and strangers,      is to feel excluded
                                                 children and adults



Social media companies                           Features are designed to          Children feel under pressure
want to maximise interaction                     encourage content creation        to get feedback and validation
on their product                                 and integrate metrics for         online, and change their
                                                 popularity and validation         behaviour to try to gain these
                                                 to promote interactivity




The outcomes experienced by children in this research clearly mirror the
objectives of designers when creating social media products and services.
Companies create the architecture in which children interact and explore,
and so influence what they do.

The products are designed to shape behaviour in line with their business
objectives, and these are the behaviours we see among many child
users of these products.

Some children in this research felt social media had contributed to negative
and challenging experiences they had faced growing, up surrounding body
image and relationships. At the same time, children could not imagine a
world where they were not reliant on social media.




22             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                      Introduction
SECTION 2
Designers
How designers create
digital products

“There are no safety standards – there is
 no ethics board in the digital space.”
 Product Manager
 Digital company



“People don’t know what the ‘watch outs’
 are in this work until it’s a bit too late.”
 Product Manager
 Digital company
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children          Avatars   Conclusions




To explore why digital products, in particular social media products, are
designed the way they are, we interviewed a range of professionals across
the tech industry. We asked nine product managers, creative directors,
designers, and engineers across the sector: How do you make design
decisions when you build a digital product or service?

They told us that on a day-to-day basis, their decision making is guided by
business objectives.


The business model drives design

For many digital businesses, financial success is dependent on advertising
revenue, and advertising revenue is in turn dependent on engaged users.

The quantity of customers paying attention to the content on a product
equates to the value of the business. The more people paying attention,
the more people there are to serve adverts to. The more advertising, the
more profit.

This business model drives the behaviour of those who work for social media
companies, shaping their priorities and driving design decisions.

       “Companies make their money from attention.
       Reducing attention will reduce revenue. If you are a
       designer working in an attention business, you will
       design for attention.”
       Strategy Director
       Digital company



Therefore, two key objectives for designers are to:
     1. Maximise reach:
        draw as many people onto their product as possible

     2. Maximise time:
        capture as much of their attention as possible



Social media relies on its own
audience to contribute

Some digital businesses rely on user-generated content and activity to
engage their audience.

Without user-generated content and activity, there would be no ‘social
media’ for anyone to consume. Social media depends on users posting and
sharing and that others respond, comment, ‘like’ and share.




24             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Designers
Skip to:     Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design                   Children          Avatars   Conclusions




To meet the first two objectives, which are to:
     м Maximise reach:
       draw as many people onto their product as possible

     м Maximise time:
       capture as much of their attention as possible


These companies also need to:

     м Maximise activity:
       encourage as much content generation and interaction as possible




How user-generated content and
activity drive consumption

Push notifications5 pull people onto the service – many of which involve
another user’s activity triggering them – e.g., by sending a message,
‘liking’ a post or sharing something new.

Endless scrolling feeds or quickly swipeable reels of recommended content
keep people consuming – but other users are required to create the
majority of that content.

The appeal of seeing the comments, ‘likes’ and followers tot up – mostly
relies on other people commenting, ‘liking’ and ‘following’.




Designers create a choice architecture
that shapes behaviour

While social media businesses do not, for the most part, create the
content that is consumed, they do design the architecture, infrastructure,
or environment through which it is served. The design of this ‘choice
architecture’ shapes what content is seen, by whom, and how users behave
and interact. The way it is delivered is determined by design – is it a scrolling
feed, story, reel, forum, etc.

     м The algorithm and rules behind what content is served are determined
       by design – e.g., driven by popularity, location, what the user has
       previously engaged with

     м The means of interaction and feedback between users is determined
       by design – e.g., comments, ‘likes’, follows etc.




5    A message that pops up on a mobile device to alert the user to activity in-app, even when
     that app is not actively running or open



25               Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                                         Designers
Skip to:      Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children          Avatars   Conclusions




     м The visuals, language and positioning of each feature or piece of
       content are determined by design – e.g., prominence, salience, colour,
       shape

     м The format of content that can be shared is determined by design – is
       it an image, video, or text? How is it presented visually? How long is it
       viewed for? What limitations are there on size or length?

           м E.g., on TikTok, videos up to three minutes in length


           м E.g., on Twitter, text up to 280 characters




The design and architecture of a ‘like’ button

     м The name – a ‘like’ is called a like, implying the social value of it

     м The visual of a pink heart, reinforcing the positive, social associations

     м The placement directly under the scrolling thumb (for a right-
       handed user) for maximum ease of use for most users

     м The display of how many ‘likes’ each piece of content
       has, prominently reinforcing how popular it is

     м The impact of having a lot of ‘likes’ making it more
       likely the piece of content will be seen by larger
       numbers of people (e.g., on the ’For You‘ page)




Designers encourage behaviour by
making it appealing and easy

Designs will make a behaviour more likely if they:

     м Make it easier, reducing friction

     м Increase its appeal by offering incentives or rewards


Designers are taught these as basic principles of behaviour change and of
‘good design’.

Frameworks such as BJ Fogg’s B=MAP demonstrate how these approaches
are used to steer user behaviour in user experience design (UX Design).
Designers aim to tap into a user’s underlying motivations, make the
experience as seamless and natural as possible and provide regular
prompts or triggers to build behaviours into habits. These approaches are
also referred to as ‘persuasive design’, ‘behaviour design’ or ‘captology’
and are used across commerce, gaming, and wider media as well as social
media products. These ideas are drawn from behavioural economics and
‘nudge’ literature.6



6    See Nir Eyal’s ‘Hooked model’ or BJ Fogg’s ‘Behavioural model’



26                Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Designers
What is friction in design?

Friction in design can be defined as anything that requires the user to work
by clicking, tapping or having to think harder. Frictionless design therefore
is the removal of any barrier, resistance or effort between the user and an
intended action.

Humans take the path of least resistance by default, so designers can guide
user behaviour by making an experience easier, more frictionless.

Device screens have a fixed size (especially on mobile), so designers must
make conscious decisions about what to prioritise to be frictionless.

Designers invest most in making the most commercially valuable features as
easy to use as possible.



High value, commercially important features                             Low value, less commercially important
will tend to be low friction:                                           features will tend to be higher friction:
     м Fewer clicks                                                        м More clicks
     м Less pagination                                                     м More pagination
     м Faster load time                                                    м Slower load time
     м Passive consumption (e.g., watch, read)                             м Active input (e.g., write, create)
     м Image rather than text (e.g., emojis)                               м Text rather than image
     м Short                                                               м Long




More clicks = more friction
0 clicks                                1 click                     2 clicks                      3 clicks




27             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                     Designers
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children          Avatars   Conclusions




Success is measured by time, reach and activity

The professionals we interviewed talked about the types of commercial
objectives, targets or ‘key performance indicators’ (KPIs) they worked to.
These always aligned with the revenue model of the business – for many
businesses: more people, more time, more activity.

Talking to those who work in digital companies makes it obvious just how
much pressure they are under to compete. New entrants to the market can
easily ‘steal’ customers, changing the fortunes of a company at great speed.

       “If a senior person gives a directive, say increase
       reach, then that’s what designers design for without
       necessarily thinking about the consequences of doing
       that.”
       Product manager
       Digital company


“Senior stakeholders like simple KPIs. Not complex arguments about user
needs and human values.” Product manager – Digital company

Features that introduce friction or nudge users away from the business’s
objectives are rare, and where they exist are seen as exceptions that prove
the rule.

       “Instagram’s feature that tells you ‘you’ve exhausted
       all your new content’ [‘You’re all caught up’ – see
       right]…I don’t know how that feature shipped – I
       think that person deserves a medal […] Because that
       disincentivises people to use Instagram – any product
       manager that is looking at time on app would argue
       against that.”
       Design Director
       Social media company


“The reason that there isn’t more of the ‘you’re all caught up’ that Instagram
has is because you have to weigh up money versus health.” Analytics
Manager – Social media company

More complex, meaningful outcomes such as genuine social connection or
the enrichment of a user’s life are much more difficult to measure. Digital
measurement tends towards quantity over quality, simple discrete signals
over complex nuanced outcomes. Measuring how often people exchange
messages or how many ‘followers’ they have is easy; measuring whether
those connections are friendships, or whether they make somebody’s life
better, is much harder.

“Measuring things in the short term is much easier than in the long term.”
Design Director – Social media company

“In my day to day I struggle to say that the metrics we are trying to measure
are the ones that matter to people.” Design Director – Social media
company




28             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Designers
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children          Avatars   Conclusions




These KPIs are used to continue
developing digital products

There is a huge amount of skill, effort, and data analysis invested in the
development of these digital products. Techniques such as A/B testing and
machine learning are driving this forward at great pace, getting more and
more powerful over time.



The power in A/B testing

A/B testing (or ‘split testing’) is a type of experiment for adjusting and
developing a user experience to produce the outcomes a designer wants.
The designer tweaks one feature or element at a time and splits their
users into different groups. User group A experiences the original version,
user group B experiences the new, tweaked version, without either group
necessarily being aware they are experiencing an alternate feature or user
experience. The designers can then track how the different user groups
behave with each version of the experience – measuring key metrics or ‘KPIs’.

These KPIs will typically be whatever the companies’ desired user behaviour
is, e.g., how much time is spent on the product, how regularly the user visits,
how much they interact with other users, etc.

Whichever version of the user experience that produces more of the desired
behaviour can then be rolled out more widely across the user base.

For social media sites with enormous user bases, these experiments can be
run at huge scale. Endless tweaks can be trialled and rolled out at speed by
running multiple experiments concurrently and over time.

       “You can easily test a new feature by seeing how
       people interact with it, then if people don’t like [or
       engage with] something you cull it. There is a ready
       and responsive audience to test this on until you are
       pretty sure you have something that they all like [or
       engage with].”
       Product Manager
       Digital product team




29             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Designers
The power in algorithm-driven recommendations

Most social media products serve content based on automated
recommendations, not just what users actively choose to follow.

The algorithms that select what content is served to users are optimising
their selections over time, tweaking the user experience to better predict
what will engage each individual user.

They choose what to show you based on what they know about you, from
the time you have spent on the app or site and information you have shared
about yourself and your interests. For example, what you ‘like’, who else
you’re connected to and what they ‘like’, what you spend time looking at,
etc.

A TikTok press release7 outlined some of the factors that are taken
into account by their content selection algorithm to tailor your content
experience more and more over time:
     м How long you spend watching a video
     м Whether you replay or watch a video through multiple times
     м What videos you ‘like’
     м What videos you ‘share’
     м Accounts you ‘follow’
     м Comments you post
     м Content you create
     м Selected categories of interest (e.g., at sign up)
     м Videos you say you are not interested in
     м Your language preference
     м The country you are in
     м The device you are using

TikTok explains how they use this information to select videos to serve
to you:

“All these factors are processed by our recommendation system and
weighted based on their value to a user. A strong indicator of interest, such
as whether a user finishes watching a longer video from beginning to end,
would receive greater weight than a weak indicator, such as whether the
video’s viewer and creator are both in the same country. Videos are then
ranked to determine the likelihood of a user's interest in a piece of content,
and delivered to each unique ’For You‘ feed.”

The algorithm uses features of videos such as captions, hashtags and the
music and sound effects embedded in them to select similar videos, or ones
that other users have also engaged with.

Content is continually refined more and more towards what you are most
likely to engage with, amplifying what captures your attention the most.




7    https://newsroom.tiktok.com/en-us/how-tiktok-recommends-videos-for-you/



30              Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk               Designers
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children          Avatars   Conclusions




Designers have concerns about the
impact of their products on users

Many of those we interviewed admitted that, on a day-to-day basis, they are
not thinking about the potential negative impacts of the way their products
are designed.

Most professionals talked about the good intentions and ambition amongst
designers, especially those newly entering the sector. They felt that most
colleagues went into tech because they wanted to make a difference in the
world, and digital design is a way to achieve large-scale reach and impact.
They want to make products that people love and want to use.

“All the new designers I hire certainly want to do good – working in tech
provides an unmatched reach.” Design Director – Social media company

But they often reflected that it was easy to fall into the trap of assuming that
if lots of people are using their product, that equates to it being a ‘good
product’. Some felt that tech attracted ambitious but often naïve employees
who were excited by the reach that digital design can offer, but rarely
reflected on whether this reach was a positive for the world:

       “It’s really just a bunch of naïve and super-smart –
       book-smart and computer-smart, not empathy-smart –
       kids. They just want to make the best stuff, or because
       they can, or because it’s cool.”
       Analytics Manager
       Social media company


However, during these interviews, all professionals acknowledged that they
had concerns the architecture they build and the content they help share
have the potential to negatively impact users. Some are concerned that
by constantly tailoring what people see, their users may find it harder and
harder to stop.

“You see all kinds of content that gets engagement that doesn’t feel
awesome.” Design Director – Social media company

The power behind machine-learning algorithms that refine content
recommendations means this can happen at great speed and scale. Some
do express concern that giving children more and more of exactly what they
seem to like and refining it closer and closer to what engages them the most
could be very problematic.

       “TikTok is basically just a mass A/B test. It feeds you
       in 15-second drips, the volume of content, something
       about how short it is – it’s such a tight fit. But what are
       the long run implications of people devoting so much
       time to it? How will it impact [on] public health, teen
       development, identity, social connection?”
       Design Director
       Social media company




31             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Designers
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children          Avatars   Conclusions




But they felt that, while the business incentives and therefore targets stay
as they are, the opportunity to change the way they work is limited and any
effort to do so would be an uphill battle.

They recognised that there is often a fundamental conflict of interest
between their business and their users.

       “Your personal beliefs may not always align with the
       beliefs of your company.”
       Analytics Manager
       Social media company


Professionals recognised that negative or harmful experiences often take
place on social media products that they have contributed to building.
Many raised concerns about the impact of beautifying filters, content-
refining algorithms and high-volume notifications on users, especially
for children.

Discussions about safety on social media with designers almost always came
back to moderation and enforcing of community guidelines. Social media
companies invest huge amounts of money in reactive approaches to harm
– responding to user-reports, scanning for risky keywords, retrospectively
detecting illegal content such as child abuse imagery or terrorist activity.
However, most designers recognised that the design process itself was
inherent to many of the concerns they held, and without changing those
processes, outcomes were unlikely to change for children.




32             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Designers
Deconstructing
design

How digital products
use design to shape                                   MAXIMISING              MAXIMISING
                                                     CONSUMPTION               ACTIVITY
behaviour
Social media companies use a range of design
strategies to shape the behaviour of users in line    by making consumption    by making activity
with their goals – more people, spending more
time, driving more activity.
                                                      APPEALING               APPEALING
And they do so by making those behaviours
a) appealing and b) easy. Tapping into human
drives sets up a motivation for the behaviour – a     by making consumption    by making activity

reason to do it. Making it simple and frictionless         EASY                   EASY
then makes it easy for people to pursue those
motivations.



Social media companies
want to:

Maximise consumption
– scrolling, watching, swiping

Maximise activity
– connecting, interacting, creating



Social media companies
shape these behaviours by:

   м Making it appealing

   м Making it easy
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design         Children         Avatars     Conclusions




Maximising                                                                     Maximising
consumption                                                                    activity
Social media companies want to maximise                                        Gamification is a design strategy used to
the amount of time users spend consuming                                       promote engagement and activity across a
content, to maximise advertising revenue.                                      wide range of digital products and services.
                                                                               Gamification is common in the gaming and
This objective is common to a wide range
                                                                               gambling sectors but is also increasingly
of digital products and services beyond
                                                                               finding its way into a wide range of digital
social media – any sector where the business
                                                                               products (e.g., e-learning, digital health, and
objective is to maintain engagement with
                                                                               fitness products.)
the user. Video-on-demand services,
online retail and news sites are all examples                                  Social media companies rely on user-
of digital products that use a range of                                        generated content, interactivity and
design strategies to maximise time spent                                       networks to draw people onto their products
on platform.                                                                   and keep them engaged.
                                                                               They use a range of design strategies to
                                                                               make this kind of activity as appealing as
                                                                               possible, and to make it as easy as possible.
                                                                               These strategies in effect ‘gamify’ social
                                                                               activity to promote interactivity – by
                                                                               implying what the goals are (e.g., popularity),
                                                                               giving out points (e.g., how many ‘likes’
                                                                               or followers you have) and rewarding the
                                                                               ‘winners’ (e.g., ‘going viral’ or getting paid to
                                                                               be an influencer).




34             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                  Deconstructing design
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design        Children        Avatars   Conclusions




Design strategies for. . .

Maximising                                                                     Maximising
consumption                                                                    activity
  By making it appealing                                                       By making it appealing

  Refining content                                                             Attaching value
  Giving you more
  of what captures
  your attention
                                                                              Defining what
                                                                               is aspirational
                                                                               and desirable
                                                                                                              
  Applying time                                                                Quantifying

                                                                                                             
  pressure                                                                     Counting and
  Making you fear                                                              comparing popularity
  missing out



  Building                                                                     Rewarding
  anticipation                                                                 Reinforcing the


                                                                                                             
  Creating suspense                                                            incentive for activity
  in the ‘reveal’
  of content




  By making it easy                                                            By making it easy

  Reducing                                                                     Making it easy

                                                                                                             
  friction                                                                     to connect
  Making it easy to                                                            Encouraging people
  keep going (and                                                              to build networks
  harder to stop)


                                                                               Making it easy

                                                                                                              
                                                                               to interact
                                                                               Streamlining
                                                                               validation and
                                                                               feedback

                                                                               Making it easy

                                                                                                              
                                                                               to share
                                                                               Facilitating copying
                                                                               and content creation




35             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                Deconstructing design
STRATEGY 1 – MA XIMISING CONSUMPTION                              D How to spot this strategy

Refining content
Giving you more of what                                                      Content observed:

                                                                             0:23/1:20                 


captures your attention
                                                                             Content observed:

The content that is served to users is selected using ever-                  0:36/0:40
improving algorithms that respond to input behaviour.
                                                                                                       
Over time, the formula gets better and better at selecting
content that is likely to result in each individual continuing
to consume.

For a user, this means that the more they use social media, the
more data is gathered about what kind of content they seem
                                                                  Apps can collect data about how the user
to pay most attention to. Over time, the content served to        engages with each individual piece of
them becomes more and more optimised for capturing their          content – did they watch all the way through?
                                                                  Pause? Adjust volume? This data is built into
attention, and more uniquely tailored to individual users.
                                                                  a ‘profile’ of each user to build a picture of
                                                                  what they pay most attention to.

Examples:
Designers use data such as how long you spent watching a
video or hovering over a picture, what you ‘like’, what you
share on to others to determine what else to serve up to you.
This might be more content from the same creator, theme or
genre or that uses the same soundtrack, hashtags or captions.
It might serve content that successfully engaged other people
who paid attention to the same things you paid attention
to. It might select content based on your location, or other
personal data.

Digital products and services, including social media, send
regular prompts to the user to engage with ‘recommended’
content – e.g., ‘suggested for you’ or ‘more like this’.          Where they have introduced interactive
Notifications are the most ubiquitous form of prompt across       features (e.g., ‘liking’, ‘sharing’, ‘following’)
                                                                  designers have enabled the app to collect
social media – nudging the user every time there is relevant      even more data about how much a user
activity on the app for them to engage with.                      engaged with each piece of content.




                                                                                          1st



                                                                              2nd




                                                                       3rd          4th



                                                                                          5th



                                                                              6th                7th



                                                                              8th




                                                                  This data is fed into algorithms that rank and
                                                                  queue other available content according to
                                                                  what it assesses is most likely to capture your
                                                                  attention and keep you consuming for longer.



 See examples of this strategy in the digital world              36
STRATEGY 2 – MA XIMISING CONSUMPTION                                                D How to spot this strategy

Applying time pressure
Making you fear missing out
Features that make content only temporarily available, or only
viewable ‘live’, are used to encourage users to engage with it
immediately, or on a regular basis.

Constraints placed on the availability of content will elevate its
perceived value for users according to the ‘scarcity’ heuristic.8
                                                                                                   4
When people feel that content is only going to be available
now or for a limited time, they are more likely to over-estimate
how valuable it is due to its perceived scarcity.
                                                                                                   3
Features that display a ‘running total’ of activity (e.g., how
many days a user has done something consecutively) tap into
the cognitive bias of ‘loss aversion’9 – people’s motivation to                              !!!
preserve something they already have, over and above their
motivation to acquire something of the same value in the
first place. Giving a user a ‘score’ based on their behaviour
incentivises them to maintain it, even if they wouldn’t have
gone out of their way to get it in the first place.

                                                                                    Anywhere that a countdown or timer is
                                                                                    used to indicate availability of content,
Examples:                                                                           this strategy is being used to increase
                                                                                    user motivation to engage with it quickly.
‘Stories’ on multiple social media apps and sites are available
for 24 hours only after being posted, with notifications
reminding users when they are posted. Live-streamed content
is presented, and often not available later ‘on demand’.
Content that is only available temporarily is often highlighted
as such with specific graphics, colour schemes or labelling.

Notifications that content is available, new or about to expire
increase this motivation to engage with it sooner.

Features such as ‘streaks’ on Snapchat reinforce the motivation
to engage with the app or with particular users every 24 hours,
to maintain their ‘score’.




                                                                                    Where users are given any ‘running total’
                                                                                    of consecutive activities – e.g., how many
8     Cialdini, RB. (2008). Influence: Science and Practice, 5th ed. (Boston:       days in a row they have done something
      Pearson).                                                                     – this strategy is being used to increase
9     Kahneman, D & Tversky, A (2013). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision     motivation to keep the behaviour going on
      under risk. In Handbook of the fundamentals of financial decision making:     a regular basis. The longer the ‘streak’,
      Part I (pp. 99-127)                                                           the greater the perceived loss of breaking it.



    See examples of this strategy in the digital world                             37
STRATEGY 3 – MA XIMISING CONSUMPTION                                 D How to spot this strategy


Building anticipation
Creating suspense in the
‘reveal’ of content
The prospect of particularly enjoyable or rewarding
experiences appearing at different or random points in
the user journey reinforces what is known as a ‘variable
reward ratio’.

The uncertainty of when a valuable reward will be delivered has
been shown to produce very high engagement across a wide
range of domains, and to result in habits that persist over time.

Animations, graphics and other features often reinforce
the sense of mystery or excitement in the ‘reveal’ of
valuable content.


Examples:
Across digital products, this variable reward ratio that delivers
rewarding experiences at unpredictable intervals is common.
In many online games, ‘loot boxes’ can be purchased which            When content appears to be ‘randomly’
                                                                     queued, and particularly high value or
contain an unknown mix of lower and higher value rewards or
                                                                     popular content is visually highlighted (e.g.,
prizes (e.g., weapons in a combat game or players in a team          with lots of ‘likes’ or special graphics or
sports game). These transactions are often made extremely            labelling), the designer has used this strategy
                                                                     to build engagement and anticipation.
‘low-friction’ and easy through in-game or in-app purchase
features, followed by particularly dramatic or exciting graphics
when a ‘big win’ is made. Slot machine-like mechanisms
operate on a similar principle of fast-paced activity with
random-interval rewards or ‘wins’, with similarly low-friction
payment (coin goes in the slot) and exciting and dramatic ‘wins’
(flashing lights, noise, celebration).

There are parallels in the design of some social media. Most
social media feeds offer high quantity and bitesized content
(e.g., short video clips, pictures, snippets of text) presented in
a somewhat randomised (or perceived randomised) order.

The prospect of hitting on content that carries social capital
– e.g., it is particularly ‘shareable’ and will garner a positive
reaction if reposted is particularly appealing and therefore
carries greater perceived reward.

Many notifications across social media are designed to not
‘give away’ too much about the content they are trying to
engage you with – e.g., they often will not contain the full
                                                                     Any time a digital product offers an unknown
message or who exactly has ‘liked’ your post, to keep the            reward or prize within an ‘unlockable’
suspense of what kind of ‘reward’ has been received until the        package, it is tapping into this ‘randomising
                                                                     rewards’ strategy. The prospect of getting
user has clicked through.                                            high or low value rewards is kept a mystery
                                                                     until opened, and often high value rewards
                                                                     are highlighted with particular fanfare and
                                                                     celebratory graphics.



 See examples of this strategy in the digital world                 38
STRATEGY 4 – MA XIMISING CONSUMPTION                                 D How to spot this strategy

Reducing friction
Making it easy to keep going
(and harder to stop)
Once the user is online, strategies that make it easy and
frictionless to keep consuming content are used to prolong
their time online. Minimising the need for users to make
active choices and removing distractions make continued
consumption the easiest path.

If stopping is just one click more effort than continuing, it tips
the balance in favour of continuing. It takes proactive effort
and therefore active intention or additional willpower to stop.

Friction can also be introduced which makes it harder to
stop. By introducing friction in the closing of an app, or in the
diverting to an alternate activity, the product can make it even
less likely the user will leave.


Examples:
The content across many social media apps and sites is
                                                                     Designers have made every effort to make
configured to automatically play or refresh. Often ‘auto-play'       consumption frictionless when only a simple
features mean that videos start without requiring the user to        one-motion swipe moves the user on to the
                                                                     next post, or when a motion is ergonomically
press any buttons. Videos often loop back to the beginning
                                                                     optimised to be as easy as possible for most
or automatically move on to the next post when they reach            users (e.g., one finger, right-handed).
the end. Endless scrollable feeds present more content with
minimal effort required from the user – e.g., a single tap
or swipe.

On some social media apps, hitting the ‘return’ or ‘back’
button once on many smartphones does not result in quitting
the app or stopping the playing of content. It might instead
send you to the top of the feed or to a different homepage
within the app. Many social media apps require a ‘double tap’
of the return button to quit the app, introducing additional
friction to stopping, when continuing remains frictionless.




                                                                           Next video loading




                                                                     When a piece of content auto-plays or
                                                                     moves on to the next automatically, the
                                                                     experience is even more frictionless,
                                                                     and therefore even more likely to keep
                                                                     the user consuming.



 See examples of this strategy in the digital world                 39
STRATEGY 5 – MA XIMISING ACTIVITY                                   D How to spot this strategy

Attaching value
Defining what is aspirational
and desirable
In choosing how they describe, label and present different                                 Any time where
features, social media ascribes value to different elements.                               content is
                                                                                           given priority
Features that facilitate connection, interaction and creation
                                                                                           and labelled
are ‘promoted’ by associating them with positivity, popularity,                #trending   with language
and aspiration.                                                                            that suggests
                                                                                           it is particularly
These signals tap into people’s social psychology, e.g., through                           valuable, this
                                                                                           strategy is being
social norming and people’s desire to conform and gain                                     used.
affirmation from those they admire.


Examples:
Choosing language such as ‘trending’ for popular content
is suggesting the social value of paying attention to it.
Categorising your most frequent contacts as ‘best friends’
implies that frequency equates to quality.

By making the ‘like’ button a pink heart or a ‘thumbs up’ icon,                            Hierarchy and
they are associating it with positive emotions and relationships,                          ranking is
                                                                                           commonly used
and promoting these features as positive and valuable to                 Leaderboard       to infer value and
the user.                                                                1st               importance, and
                                                                                           the metric used
                                                                         2nd
                                                                                           to do this ranking
                                                                         3rd               (often popularity)
                                                                                           is intrinsically
                                                                         4th               then associated
                                                                         5th               as positive
                                                                                           and worthy of
                                                                         6th
                                                                                           pursuing.




                                                                                           Icons, imagery,
                                                                                           colour and
                                                                                           graphics are all
                                                                                           used to infer
                                                                                           value. Universally
                                                                                           recognised
                                                                                           symbols are
                                                                                           often common
                                                                                           across cultures
                                                                                           and communities
                                                                                           (e.g., hearts, stars,
                                                                                           trophies = good,
                                                                                           shields = safety,
                                                                                           etc) and are used
                                                                                           to infer meaning to
                                                                                           the user.



 See examples of this strategy in the digital world                40
STRATEGY 6 – MA XIMISING ACTIVITY                                    D How to spot this strategy

Quantifying
Counting and comparing
popularity
Counting and prominently displaying quantified information
about social activity is designed to draw user attention to it.
Users are shown these ‘points’ tallies both for themselves and
all of the other users they interact with across social media.

People naturally compare themselves and want to compete
with others, and will do so based on whatever information
is available. In choosing which elements of social media
to quantify and display, companies are implicating these
as ‘objectives’.
                                                                          12k 14k          9k
Clearly displayed quantified information about content will
be seen by the user as a signal of how popular or socially
acceptable it is, tapping into their desire to conform to social
norms and fit in.


Examples:
Most social media will count and display the number of
                                                                     Anywhere that a digital product displays a
connections – ‘friends’, ‘followers’, ‘following’ – each user has.
                                                                     count or metric, this strategy is being used.
Individual content is displayed clearly alongside a count of how     The decision as to what they choose to count
many ‘likes’ or ‘shares’ it has received.                            tells you something about what they are
                                                                     trying to draw users' attention to.
As well as quantity, some apps highlight which people have
liked a post, e.g., which celebrities or which of your friends
has liked your post, reinforcing quantified popularity with the
affirmation of particularly aspirational or influential figures in
your life.

Some social media apps and sites keep tallies of how many
days in a row two users have been in communication with each
other, incentivising users to maintain daily contact regardless
of the quality of that interaction.                                        Follower Ratio

                                                                                 3:1




                                                                     Where they display contrasts or ratios of
                                                                     metrics, designers are building in an element
                                                                     of comparison or competition, further
                                                                     motivating users to care about and value
                                                                     whatever is being counted.



  See examples of this strategy in the digital world                41
STRATEGY 7 – MA XIMISING ACTIVITY                                    D How to spot this strategy

Rewarding
Reinforcing the incentive
for activity
Some social media companies actively design in additional
rewards and incentives beyond social affirmation for the
behaviours they want, either literally or symbolically. Popularity
is rewarded above all else.


Examples:
                                                                           Send a gift
Content that has received high volumes of engagement will be
displayed more prominently, be more likely to ‘go viral’ or be
shown to greater numbers of other users.

There is wide awareness that ‘high-performing’ content can
also lead to paid-for sponsorships or product placement deals,
leading to further financial reward.
                                                                     Visual or symbolic rewards often take the
On some digital products, users who generate a large                 form of coins, badges or trophies, or are
                                                                     deemed valuable due to their ‘unique’ or
amount of followership are paid by the company itself to             ‘bespoke’ status. Anywhere that the product
produce content.                                                     offers users recognition for their activity
                                                                     (e.g., based on popularity, status, influence)
In other cases, ‘badge’ or ‘token’ graphics are used to              they have built in rewards to reinforce
celebrate achievements that relate to activity they want             certain behaviours.

to incentivise – e.g., reaching a certain number of ‘views’
or ‘followers’.




                                                                     Many products go further and either provide
                                                                     or facilitate actual financial rewards for users
                                                                     for desired behaviours. This might be by
                                                                     enabling sponsorships and other third-
                                                                     party financial arrangements, introducing
                                                                     functionality for transactions between users,
                                                                     or simply paying users who generate high
                                                                     levels of activity or advertising revenue.



 See examples of this strategy in the digital world                 42
STRATEGY 8 – MA XIMISING ACTIVITY                                    D How to spot this strategy

Making it easy
to connect
Encouraging people
to build networks

Social media companies design in features that facilitate the
building of networks by enabling users to easily discover and
connect with other users. Often these features are optimised
to make connections as easy and frictionless as possible too.


Examples:
Most social media apps and sites will recommend large
numbers of potential accounts to befriend/follow, based on
the contact numbers or email addresses stored on the phone,
or contacts brought across from other apps (e.g., Facebook
friends might be recommended on Instagram).

In many apps, users can send direct messages to other users
that are not already connections (e.g., not accepted as friends
or followers), reducing the friction between making contact.

Other apps recommend profiles based on location, ‘friends
of friends’ or mutual interests. Profile identifiers such as         Any examples where the ability to connect
usernames or QR codes enable users to share their profile with       with other users or make choices about
                                                                     who to ‘befriend’ is particularly simple or
others on and off-app to make wider connections.                     frictionless, this strategy is being used.

For many apps, privacy settings are ‘off’ by default, meaning
the user must go out of their way (i.e., more friction) to make it
harder for others to connect with them. It is, by default, easier
for users to make connections than to avoid doing so.

Some apps and sites have built interfaces that minimise the
friction involved in connections even further, e.g., with a ‘left-
right’ one swipe selection for ‘befriend’ or ‘reject’.

Blocking or ‘unfriending’ usually requires more clicks or actions
(i.e.., more friction) than ‘following’ or ‘friending’.




                                                                          Followers

                                                                          Quick add




                                                                     Similarly, this strategy is at play in cases
                                                                     where the design enables users to quickly
                                                                     (with few clicks) find and connect with large
                                                                     numbers of people.




 See examples of this strategy in the digital world                 43
STRATEGY 9 – MA XIMISING ACTIVITY                                    D How to spot this strategy

Making it easy
to interact
Streamlining validation
and feedback

Companies design in a variety of ways of streamlining
interactivity and means for giving feedback and validation
to other users. By simplifying the channels for interacting,
the barriers to giving other users feedback is lowered and
the likelihood increased. This then increases the expected or
‘normal’ volume of interaction, creating a self-reinforcing cycle.

As well as making the channels for interacting simple, some
social media companies nudge users further by introducing
pre-populated responses or ‘one click’ positive reactions.


Examples:
The ‘like’ button is the most ubiquitous and well-known
channel for interactivity and feedback across a wide range of
social media products. It represents the ultimate simplified and
streamlined ‘one-click’ channel for providing validation and         When mechanisms for interacting are made
                                                                     as ergonomically easy as possible (e.g., a
feedback to other users.                                             double tap anywhere on the screen), this
                                                                     strategy is attempting to encourage users to
The fact that the ‘like’ button is prominently displayed             make use of it.
and positioned conveniently under the thumb (for a right-
handed user) increases the level of ease with which users can
provide feedback.

Other examples include the pre-selected range of emojis,
stickers or comments often available in comment boxes
or instant messenger interfaces. These are almost always
predominantly positive (smiling emojis, positive affirmations) as
opposed to negative, nudging users towards positive feedback
and validation towards other users.




                                                                     Reducing the required ‘input’ or effort
                                                                     for interacting and giving others positive
                                                                     feedback is another common example of
                                                                     this strategy.



 See examples of this strategy in the digital world                 44
STRATEGY 10 – MA XIMISING ACTIVITY                                   D How to spot this strategy

Making it easy to share
Facilitating copying and
content creation
All social media products provide a means through which to
create and share user-generated content. These can range
from the very simple (a text field for crafting a comment)
through to the sophisticated (video templates and editing                 Template gallery
tools).

Companies often design tools for emulating or copying trends,
or for improving the aesthetic appearance of content to make it
easier for users to create content that will successfully engage
or entertain other users.

Short of creating original content, companies usually make it
as easy as possible to re-share content created by other users,
maximising the amount of content that is ‘shared’ with the
widest possible audience.


Examples:
Many social media products have features that enable the
editing of content before it is posted. Filters, lenses and photo-   Any features that are designed to make it
editing tools are all designed to enable the user to ‘improve’       easy to copy or create content are examples
                                                                     of this strategy being deployed, especially
the aesthetics of images or videos that they might post as           when they help the user emulate popular or
easily as possible.                                                  ‘cool’ trends.

Some digital products ‘beautify’ images by default through the
camera function (e.g., smoothing skin, changing face shape) –
subtly encouraging users to create content they may then feel
comfortable sharing more widely.

Others provide tools and templates for creating videos that
fit into trends, such as using particular filters, soundtracks or
voice-overs.

Most apps make the ‘re-share’ feature as frictionless as
possible, e.g., with a ‘one click’ button.




                                                                          1   2    3     4     5




                                                                     Tools that help users to easily improve
                                                                     aesthetics or reduce any insecurities they
                                                                     might have about images/videos are also
                                                                     examples of this strategy being used to
                                                                     encourage users to create content.



 See examples of this strategy in the digital world                 45
Skip to:    Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design              Children        Avatars         Conclusions




How design strategies work
together to shape behaviour
1                                                        2                                                      3




User scrolls through a feed                            User sees that a post has a lot of ‘likes’      User can click through to see what
of images and videos.                                  which suggests it is popular with others.       type of filter was used to make
                                                                                                       the post, which may have been
    Reducing friction                                   Attaching value                              a factor in why it is so popular.

                                                         Quantifying                                    Making it easy to share         
                                                       They hit ‘like’ themselves.

                                                         Making it easy to interact 


4                                                        5                                                      6




User is taken to a tool                                User takes a photo of themselves                User posts their new filtered photo and
where they can use the filter                          using the same filter and                       gets regular notifications about how
themselves to make a post.                             posts it to their profile.                      many ‘likes’ and comments they get
                                                                                                       on it as a metric for how popular it is.
    Making it easy to share                             Making it easy to share       
                                                                                                         Attaching value                 ฀

                                                                                                         Quantifying                     ฀


46              Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                      Deconstructing design
Skip to:    Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design      Children         Avatars     Conclusions




Summary

When interviewed, designers of social media products and services told us:

     м Designers work to the brief they are given, and in many businesses,
       the success of a feature or product is judged by its ability to shape the
       behaviour of users in line with business goals.

     м Designers of social media products use a wide range of strategies to
       encourage users to: 1) spend time on their product, 2) attract more
       users, to 3) interact and generate content.

     м The business model of social media products relies on their ability to
       shape behaviour according to these three outcomes; if they fail to do
       so, they will not generate revenue.

     м There is a huge amount of expertise, power and data behind these
       design strategies, including mass A/B testing and machine-learning
       algorithms, constantly optimising for revenue generation against these
       three outcomes.

     м The functionality of these products can be deconstructed to reveal
       the ‘design strategies’ used to shape behaviour – from refining what
       content users see to make it more and more appealing, and removing
       friction, to promoting social interaction and encouraging content
       creation through features like filters and editing tools.

     м Designers expressed concern about the impact of their design process
       on users.




Business objectives                               Design strategies

Social media companies want to                    Social media is designed             Children feel like they
maximise time on their product                    to engage users by making            spend too much time online
                                                  content more and more                it, find it hard to stop
                                                  appealing, and reducing
                                                  friction in consumption


Social media companies                            Features are designed                Children have extensive
want to maximise the                              to promote and extend                networks and connections
reach of their product                            networks and connections,            online, to be offline is
                                                  between peers and strangers,         to feel excluded
                                                  children and adults



Social media companies                            Features are designed to             Children feel under pressure
want to maximise interaction                      encourage content creation           to get feedback and validation
on their product                                  and integrate metrics for            online, and change their
                                                  popularity and validation            behaviour to try to gain it
                                                  to promote interactivity


47              Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk               Deconstructing design
SECTION 3
Children
How children experience
digital products




                          v
Skip to:     Introduction             Designers           Deconstructing design                 Children         Avatars        Conclusions




We know that many digital products, especially social media, are designed
to shape behaviour and that a huge amount of power sits behind their ability
to do so. This is the same whether that user is an adult or a child. Children
are often offered largely the same experience as adults, with access to the
same functionality and features regardless of age.10

Most social media products set 13 as their minimum age limit. We also know
that currently age-varification is poor, and many children under that age use
social media – Ofcom’s latest statistics suggest 42% of 5–12-year-olds use
social media apps or sites.11
                                                                                                                      42%
                                                                                                                      of 5–12-year-olds
We set out to explore what this digital world is like for them. We interviewed                                        use social media
21 children and young people aged 12 to 18 across the UK12 – mapping their                                            apps or sites
use of digital products and services, what they had experienced, and how they
felt about it.

Most studies on this topic rely solely on self-reported data to understand
children’s experiences online, and as a result are limited by what children can
(or want to) tell us. For this research, we also collected screen-record, app-
usage data and social media activity (with particular care taken to ensure
fully informed consent: see appendices).

This data allowed us to see what they see, and explore their actual
experiences while using digital products and services, rather than just what
they can remember retrospectively.




Ken, 12                  Lara, 13                  Sam, 14                   Otis, 14                Ellie, 14              Jack, 14




James, 14                Hannah, 14                Wendy, 15                 Otto, 15                Cornelia, 15           Katie, 15




Alara, 15                Dan, 15                   Matilda, 16               Darius, 16              Niomi, 16              Bob, 16




Tod, 16                  Carrie, 17                Chris, 18




10 Exceptions to this include some more recent product updates that are restricting
   functionality or default settings for users under a certain age – e.g., TikTok users under the
   age of 16 will now have their accounts set to more stringent privacy settings by default.
11 Ofcom – Children and parents: media use and attitudes report, 2020/21
12 This research was conducted in summer 2020 when Covid-19 related restrictions allowed for
   face-to-face fieldwork.



49               Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                                        Children
Skip to:   Introduction            Designers            Deconstructing design           Children         Avatars      Conclusions




Who did we meet?

We recruited young people based on their self-reported social media
consumption – with most of the young people we spoke to using social
media daily. We included children with varying experiences of using digital
products and services that are known to be common among children and
young people, including:13




                 Sharing pictures of                                 75% of 12–15-year-olds say they have posted or shared
                 themselves online                                   content on video-sharing platforms such as TikTok, Instagram
                                                                     and Snapchat (Ofcom media use and attitudes, 2020/21).



                 Using filters or editing                            48% of girls and young women aged 11 to 21 have used filters
                 apps on pictures of                                 or editing apps to make themselves look better and 34% say
                 themselves                                          they will not post a photo of themselves unless they edit their
                                                                     appearance (Girlguiding Girls Attitudes Survey).13



                 Engaging with content                               54% of girls and young women aged 11 to 21 have seen
                 that makes them feel                                adverts online that have made them feel pressured to look
                 negatively about their                              different (Girlguiding Girls Attitudes Survey).
                 appearance


                 Engaging with people                                30% of 12–15-year-olds say they have been contacted by a
                 they do not know online                             stranger online who wanted to be their friend (Ofcom media
                                                                     use and attitudes, 2020/21).



                 Seeing explicit or                                  31% of 12–15-year-olds that go online report having seen
                 upsetting content online                            worrying or nasty content online. About a fifth reported
                                                                     seeing content they found scary or troubling, or something of
                                                                     a sexual nature that made them feel uncomfortable (Ofcom
                                                                     media use and attitudes, 2020/21).




13 Girl Guiding – Girls’ Attitudes Survey, 2020



50              Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                                 Children
Skip to:    Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children         Avatars       Conclusions




Children are growing up within the
choice architecture of social media

Across our sample, social media was central in young people’s lives. It was
instrumental in almost all areas, from making friends and exploring interests,
to exploring their sexuality, finding out what makes somebody popular and
expressing political views.

At the highest level, children told us that:

     м They spend more time on social media than many of them felt they
       should, and they often found it hard to stop.

     м It‘s where all of their friends are, where they see content they like, and
       it feels like one of their main windows onto the world around them.
       To stay off social media would feel like being excluded.

     м They seek validation and attention online in the form of ‘likes’,
       comments and connections, and they shape what they do online in
       order to gain more.



How does social media encourage
children to spend time online?


Children are spending more time online
than they think they should
Many admitted to staying up scrolling on social media late into the night.

Bob (16) recognised that he was spending excessive time online, but
struggled to imagine how else he would use his time:

       “I feel like I should probably cut down…[but] it’s where
       I’m happiest. It’s important for passing the time.”
       Bob (16)


James (14) spent around seven hours per day on his phone or gaming on a
console. A lot of that time is spent on TikTok, where he felt it was all too easy
to lose track of time with the endless feed of videos about things that he
finds entertaining – e.g., boxing, memes, pranks.                                          Reducing friction                 ฀

Otto (15) spent an average of 13 hours a day on his phone, and particularly
                                                                                           Refining content                  ฀
enjoyed using Snapchat, TikTok and Instagram. He would also be on his
phone while gaming, chatting to his friends using Snapchat and Discord.
Otto developed a new group of friends online, through the ‘random pairing’
feature of Omegle, and often stayed up all night chatting to them, as some
                                                                                           Making it easy to connect         ฀
are in different time zones. Recently, he’s been spending around seven hours
every day on Omegle.




51              Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Children
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design       Children         Avatars       Conclusions




       “Sometimes I’ll go on it at like 11pm and won’t go off
       it until six in the morning.”
       Otto (15)


Tod (16) was equally prone to being on social media late into the night. He
gets anxiety, which tends to be worse at night, and he often has nightmares
when he sleeps. As a result, he often doesn’t want to sleep, and instead
stays up streaming things on YouTube, and scrolling through the ‘explore’
feed on Instagram. The default auto-play function on YouTube starts a new                     Reducing friction                 
recommended video every time one finishes, which he finds can lead him to
easily spend hours and hours with video content that keeps his attention. His                 Refining content                  
parents tried to set some rules for his use of social media, but his mum said:
“It didn’t work.”


Children feel like they ‘can’t stop scrolling’
Children are spending a lot of time on social media. Many in our sample
were on social media for more than eight hours a day and described this as
fairly typical amongst their peer group.

Many children felt that this level of use was not entirely within their control.

Jack (14) spoke about getting into “a TikTok trance” when using the app.
He likes finding videos that he can send to his online friends and make them
laugh, often skipping through videos quickly to try to hit on a particularly
                                                                                              Randomising rewards               
funny one. He spends hours scrolling through videos with no awareness of
how much time has passed.

       “Once you start, you can’t stop.”
       Jack (14)


Hannah (14) spent a lot of her time on her phone – describing how she was
keen to have it close by her at all times.

       “I always want it near me…when I’m sitting on the sofa
       I just scroll.”
       Hannah (14)


Hannah gets large numbers of notifications from Snapchat with people
sending ‘snap me’ messages – requests to reply with a ‘Snap’ to maintain
‘Snapstreak’ scores. These messages need to be responded to within 24                         Quantifying                       
hours in order to maintain the ‘streak’.
                                                                                              Applying time pressure            
Lara (13) described how the type of video content on TikTok was perfect for
keeping your attention – short 15-second videos that you can skip through
quickly without getting bored while you try to find ones you’ll particularly
enjoy.                                                                                        Randomising rewards               




52             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                             Children
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children         Avatars       Conclusions




       “You just scroll, it’s a 15-second clip, I get bored really
       easily so 15 seconds is like the perfect amount of time.
       Sometimes I just don’t notice the time go past, I just
       get really into it.”
       Lara (13)


A minority of children had made concerted efforts to cut down on the
time they spent online, but found it a challenge. Some recognised that the
amount of time they spent on their phones involved an opportunity cost –
leaving them with less time for other activities. During remote schooling due
to lockdown Lara (13) had got into the habit of staying on her phone until
3am in bed and then sleeping until 12pm the next day, but found it difficult
to change the habit:

       “I kind of wanted to have more time to do stuff other
       than just go on my phone… [but] it didn’t work, I kept
       turning it off and then going back and still using it.”
       Lara (13)



How does social media encourage
children to build networks online?


Children are sharing with as wide a network as possible
The prominent display of these metrics (how many ‘likes’, comments,
followers, etc) means that children are all too aware of how their behaviour              Quantifying                       
translates into greater exposure.

Jack (14) will often use the ‘Quick add’ function on Snapchat to add
everyone in his area or mutual friends of his existing contacts, regardless of            Making it easy to connect         
whether he knows them. Having more connections on Snapchat makes his
Snap Map look more crowded, which he can then show off to people in real                  Quantifying                       
life and therefore appear more ‘popular’.

Many children in this research opted to keep their profiles ‘public’ rather than
‘private’ in an effort to get higher numbers of ‘likes’.
                                                                                          Making it easy to connect         
Several children even acknowledged the trade-off that often seemed
inherent in this – getting unwanted attention as well as wanted.

James (14) was keen to get more followers in order to raise his profile as a
                                                                                          Quantifying                       
boxer and potentially be sponsored by a sportswear brand. To do so, he
switched his profile from private to public, even though he knew this would
                                                                                          Rewarding                         
leave it open to unwanted interactions with strangers, like:

       “Old men and that sort of thing.”
       James (14)


Other behaviours such as using hashtags, @ing (‘tagging’) other users or                  Making it easy to connect         
using trending music on TikTok are all features on various social apps and
                                                                                          Making it easy to share           



53             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Children
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children         Avatars       Conclusions




sites that enable users to share their content more widely, and all are features
used by children in this research.

Otto (15) hits ‘like’ on almost everything he sees on Instagram – which he
said resulted in him once getting over 200 followers in one day.


Children use social media as their main
window for exploring the world
Social media was the main channel for exploring interests or discovering new
content for many young people.

Tod (16) defined a large proportion of his identity through his use of social
media. When he’s interested in something, he tends to explore it on the
Instagram ‘explore’ page, trawling through content to find things that
interest him, and that give him inspiration for his own posts. He spends most
of his time on the ‘explore feed’ of recommended content; when he sees
something he likes he’ll click through and “it takes you to a thread of similar           Refining content                  
stuff.” He looks at what he describes as “edgy stuff” and “dark humour”,
reposting to his own feed when he thinks it’s particularly funny.                         Making it easy to share           
Wendy (15) is interested in fashion, art, and music. She said her “identity is
quite important” to her – and sees her passion for these things as crucial to
her sense of identity. Social media caters for these things. On TikTok, Wendy
flicks through videos and when she sees one with a music clip that she likes,
she’ll click through the ‘music’ icon link to browse through other videos using
the same music clip, which then provides the option for using the clip in your            Making it easy to share           
own TikTok video.


Children feel like social media is ‘where
everyone, and everything’ is
Most of the children could not imagine their lives without social media. It‘s
where they felt connected to their friends and peers, where they saw content
they liked, and where they learned about the wider world. It‘s where they go
to see everyone, and everything.

Many young people spoke openly about the fact that they would have a fear
of missing out if not constantly tuned into social media; it‘s where everything
is happening.

Ellie (14) felt there was a “fear of missing out” in her age group. “People
are so scared not to be in the loop with everything.”

Lara (13) described a social life in which she would feel very excluded if not
on social media. She talks to all her friends on Snapchat, mainly by replying
to each other’s stories. They also share TikTok videos they like with each
other. If Lara didn’t spend as much of her time on social media, she wouldn’t
be in on the conversations and jokes her friends are having with each other.

       “It’s our generation, you’ll just do that [automatically
       post a picture of anything you’re doing]. Your first
       thought is basically social media. If I pick up my phone
       and open it up, I’ll go on Snapchat and Instagram
       straight away.”
       Matilda (16)


54             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Children
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children         Avatars      Conclusions




Children rely on their online networks and relationships
Many of the young people we spoke to were reliant on social connections
and communities they had found online.

Bob (16) has struggled with forming strong friendships at school in the
past few years. Despite recently finding more of a place in a local theatre
group, he saw the time he spent online – and particularly on Twitter musical
‘fandoms’ – as where he was most able to be himself. Bob is a member of
a selection of musical theatre fan groups on Twitter and follows specific
                                                                                          Making it easy to connect        
‘trending’ hashtags to keep up to date and feel connected to the subculture.
                                                                                          Attaching value                  
Ellie (14) struggled to fit into social groups at school, and instead started to
find like-minded and supportive groups of people online. When we asked
her mum about it, she described the process as “finding her people”
online. Some of these people are strangers who have sent her messages
                                                                                          Making it easy to connect        
over Instagram. Others are those she has followed from lists of ‘suggested
for you’ accounts to follow.                                                              Making it easy to connect        
Jack (14) lives in a remote village in North Wales and feels like he is cut
off from peers in his local community. He uses Yubo to talk to new people
online, using the ‘swipe left/swipe right’ feature (see below) to easily connect          Making it easy to connect        
with other people. Jack also uploaded a screenshot of his Snapchat ‘QR
code’ to his Yubo profile to enable people to easily add him on Snapchat                  Making it easy to connect        
after matching with him on Yubo.

Otis (14) lives a long way away from his school friends and doesn’t see them
much outside of school. He doesn’t have a sense of community from his local
area either, so he turns to the online world instead. In particular, he spends
a lot of time watching live streams of people playing his favourite games.
Here Otis has found a community he really feels a part of. He enjoys getting
notifications when streams are starting because it gives him a sense of bustle
and community: he likes “the sense that things are going on, right now.”
These notifications often draw him online as he is notified that one of his
favourite streamers is ‘going live’.                                                      Applying time pressure           

       “I might miss out if there were no notifications.”
       Otis (14)




55             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Children
Skip to:    Introduction            Designers           Deconstructing design   Children         Avatars       Conclusions




How does social media encourage
children to create and share content?


Children are creating vast quantities of
images and videos of themselves
On ‘user-generated content’ products, the main way to contribute and
put yourself out into the world as a user on social media is to do just
that – generate content. This might include posting photos or videos,
commenting with text, emojis or GIFs, live streaming, etc.

The apps and sites most used by children focus on visual content – images and
videos. Instagram, TikTok and Snapchat are all centred around visual media.

When children seek validation on social media, the channel through which
to get it is inevitably visual. The children we spoke to were using the in-
                                                                                           Making it easy to share           
built cameras and editing features within social media apps to create huge
numbers of images and videos of themselves.

Niomi (16) uses social media a lot but doesn’t post as much as she used to.
At 13, recognising what seemed to get attention, she would post a lot of
photos of herself on Instagram – often quite revealing ones like bikini shots.
She was pleased with how many comments and ‘likes’ the pictures received
and hoped she might even get sponsored by a brand.                                         Rewarding                         



The rise of visual media, smartphone
cameras, social media with a visual focus

In 2015, one of the best camera phones around was the iPhone 6. It had an
eight megapixel back camera. In 2020, one of the best camera phones – the
Samsung Galaxy S21 Ultra – has a 108 megapixel back camera, with a 40
megapixel ‘selfie camera’ at the front.14 The role of the camera has become
increasingly central to smartphones, and the aesthetic quality of the images
they can create is a huge selling point.

As smartphone cameras have become more of a prominent feature of
smartphones, people have been taking a lot more photos. One estimate
is that the number of photos “we’ve collectively taken…doubled between
2013 to 2017, from 6 billion to 1.2 trillion.”15

This sits alongside a rise in social media products centred around the sharing
of visual media content. Across our sample, Instagram, Snapchat and TikTok
were by far the most popular. TikTok, for example, reported 680 million users
in 2018. In 2020, it’s estimated to have over 1.1 billion users.16 Equally, the
Instagram user base has skyrocketed over the last five years, doubling from
500 million in 2016 to over 1 billion now.17




14 From ‘Best camera phones 2021’, Trusted Reviews
15 From ‘How Smartphone Cameras Changed the Way We Document Our Lives’, Slate
16 From ‘TikTok Statistics’, Wallaroo
17 From ‘Instagram Demographic Statistics’, Backlinko



56              Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Children
Skip to:    Introduction            Designers           Deconstructing design       Children         Avatars       Conclusions




Children are editing their appearance
to ‘beautify’ their images

Social media apps and sites usually provide integrated tools for ‘improving’ the
appearance of content before posting.

Children in this research used:

 м Filters and simple editing to improve the colour, contrast or crop of a picture

 м ‘Lenses’ and filters to reshape their face, change complexion or add
   animation/accessories

 м Face and body editing tools to reshape facial features, shrink waists or                    Making it easy to share           
   accentuate curves


Nearly all the girls in the research said they no longer felt comfortable posting
any images of themselves that did not include some level of editing. Some felt
uncomfortable in real life due to the contrast between their physical and ‘filtered’ self.

Carrie (17) uses the Snapchat camera features to apply filters and edits to her                Making it easy to share           
photos. She felt that filters would make her skin look better and her face more
symmetrical. When Carrie takes selfies on Snapchat, she quickly flicks through
the available filters to find one that she thinks makes her look best.

       “All my photos have filters…They make you look prettier.
       Everything is just so symmetrical…and it’s not in real life.”
       Carrie (17)


Editing apps
Face and body editing apps have emerged alongside the rise of image-centred
social media. Products like Snapchat and Instagram have developed ever more
elaborate filters and lenses for photos, too. Young people we spoke to showed
us how you could airbrush your skin, making it lighter, darker, blemish-free –
whatever you want.

Equally, editing apps like Facetune have become enormously popular. Lighttricks,
the company that owns Facetune, generated $18 million in revenue within two
years of launching the app. By 2017, Facetune was Apple’s most popular paid app.18




18 From ‘Facetune and the internet’s endless pursuit of physical perfection’, Vox



57              Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                             Children
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children         Avatars            Conclusions




Children feel pressure to get attention
and validation online

The young people in this sample care about what others think of them. Whether
explicitly or not, nearly all of them described the desire for peer approval and
validation, and the fear of being seen as uncool, unattractive, or boring.

On social media, validation comes in the form of ‘likes’, ‘comments’, ‘shares’,
and ‘followers’. The social media companies have designed in mechanisms
for users to interact with each other that indicate how much people
appreciate or admire what you have contributed. These are seen by young
people as measures of positivity, popularity and engagement.

       “It feels good to be appreciated by loads of people…                               Quantifying                            
       it makes you want to do it again.”
       Bob (16)


What’s in a ‘like’?
The choice architecture and design of digital products determine how users
interact with one another. The parameters that are set around interaction
are incredibly limiting when you compare it with, for example, face-to-face
interaction with all the nuances of speech, body language, intonation, etc.

We know from the interviews with children that interacting via the exchange                          I like this
of ‘likes’ is a hugely important aspect of social media. They are coveted                            This is funny
by most young people as a positive signal – of popularity, appreciation,
validation, etc.                                                                                     This is attractive

But we also know from these interviews that a ‘like’ can express a huge                              This is shocking
range of different intentions from the young person who gives it. The simple                         This is infuriating
heart-shaped button is used by children (and no doubt adults) to express any
number of messages or signals. We have seen many varied examples of what                             I support this
children mean when they ‘like’ a post (see right).                                                   I want to be seen by
Online validation is almost described like a currency: a resource that you try                       others to have ‘liked’ this
to gather and also that you give out to others.                                                      I want more people
Matilda (16) always ‘likes’ her friends‘ posts as a “support thing” and would                        to see this
actively question her friends if they didn’t ‘like’ her posts in return. Matilda                     I want you to notice me
recognised that this exchange of ‘likes’ doesn’t necessarily equate to actual
appreciation of what anybody had posted:                                                             You asked me to ‘like’ this

                                                                                                     I‘ve seen this
     “I don't actually have to like it to 'like' it. It’s just what you do.”
                                                                                                     I fancy you
     Matilda (16)
                                                                                                     You ‘liked’ my post, I
                                                                                                     should return the favour
The habit of giving out validation to others can become an ingrained
habitual norm amongst young people.

Otto (15) tends to ‘like’ almost everything he sees on TikTok and Instagram
– even adverts.

       “I’d feel bad if I didn’t ‘like’ everything.”
       Otto (15)


58             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Children
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design         Children         Avatars       Conclusions




Matilda (16) claimed that she and her friends acted a certain way on social
media because:

       “They want to be validated, and social media helps
       them to be validated.”
       Matilda (16)


Young people in this sample described feeling upset, disappointed, or frustrated
when their posts failed to get what they felt was enough ‘likes’ or comments.

James (14) is keen to use Instagram to raise his profile as a boxer, and carefully
curates his account, for example ensuring his ‘follower to following’ ratio                     Quantifying                       
reflects well on him, suggesting to others that he is popular (currently at 2300
‘followers’ to 900 ‘following’). He becomes frustrated when he doesn’t get as
many ‘likes’ as he wants and will delete posts regularly:

       “I’ll be a bit raging I didn’t get that many ‘likes‘.”
       James (14)


Young people were closely attuned to the types of behaviours that would or
would not get them the desired attention online. If social media is a game, they
know what winning and losing looks like, and they pay close attention to what
seems to work for other people.



The design of apps and sites helps children
copy ‘what works’ for other users




Children can see how ‘popular’              Children can easily tap links      Platforms provide links and tools for users to replicate
content is in the form of ‘likes’,          to features of the content         their own content using these same features.
comments, shares etc.                       that may be contributing
                                                                               Children use these tools to create their own content,
                                            to its popularity – e.g.,
Children use these metrics to                                                  copying the trends and features that they have
                                            hashtags, music, filters.
see what gains a lot of attention.                                             seen lead to success and popularity for others.




59             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                               Children
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design     Children         Avatars       Conclusions




Children feel pressure to act ‘cool’
and ‘grown-up’ on social media

Many children in the sample described what could make them look weird,
silly or uncool online and the lengths they go to avoid it.

Bob (16) felt that he had to curate particular personas on his social media
pages and had to act a certain way on his ‘main’ Instagram account (Bob had
several accounts on Instagram).

       “I’m careful not to have any weird photos…it’s just
       part of being on Instagram.”
       Bob (16)


Matilda (16) was similarly very conscious of looking ‘grown-up’ online:

       “You can’t post childish things on Snapchat stories…
       because you’re scared of what people might think. We
       really want to grow up as quick as we can… We want
       to look as mature as we can.”
       Matilda (16)


Jack (14) explained how everyone wants to look popular by having more
people ‘follow’ them than the number of people they ‘follow’ in return. To try
to improve his ‘follower to following’ ratio Jack would ‘follow’ lots of people             Quantifying                       
he didn’t know in the hope of getting a ‘return follow’, and then in a few days
‘unfollow’ them again to shift his ratio back again.


Children change what they look like and how
they act to get attention on social media
Matilda (16) felt pressure to look more like the models that she saw getting
huge followings on social media, who she described as all being “slim” with
“big lips”. Matilda uses filters on her photos to try to improve the aesthetics
                                                                                            Making it easy to share           
of the selfies she posts on social media, and she says a lot of her friends edit
the way they look to try to emulate the influencers who are the most popular.

Hannah (14) felt that you have to look a certain way to ‘do well’ (get lots of
‘likes’, comments, shares and followers) on TikTok:

       “The standard for TikTok is skinny, dark-haired and
       really good at dancing… If people think you’re pretty
       you will get ‘likes’.”
       Hannah (14)


Others shaped how they behaved online to try to get attention for being
funny or cool.

Bob (16) also copies certain kinds of captions that he saw getting good                     Making it easy to share           
engagement (lots of ‘likes’ and comments) when posted by other people,
e.g., “felt cute, might delete later”. He said:                                             Quantifying                       




60             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                           Children
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children         Avatars   Conclusions




       “You act differently depending on your audience... It
       can be hard to think of edgy captions, so that I could
       feel accepted.”
       Bob (16)



For some, the pressure to behave a
certain way can feel frustrating
Ellie (14) spoke of a pressure to post photos of herself that were ‘pretty’.
Although she once did so and received positive comments in response, she
was frustrated by the focus on body-centric content rather than her other
posts about her passion for art. She felt that you got more attention for
copying other people and looking good than for being creative or original
on social media:

       “I want people to go ‘you’re talented’ rather than ‘you
       look pretty’."
       Ellie (14)




61             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Children
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children         Avatars   Conclusions




Some children feel social media has
negatively impacted on them

The longer-term impacts of social media on young people are not yet
known. Research has been unable to track the role of social media in
children’s lives beyond a few years.

Some of the children we met felt strongly themselves that social media had a
negative impact on them, playing a central role in particular challenges they
had faced growing up.


Immersion in visual media and body image
The volume of image-based content that children were consuming was
enormous, and notably the focus on sexualised or body-conscious content
was clear for almost all children we interviewed, and all avatars that were run
based on them.

Several children reflected that constant immersion in this type of content
had shaped what they thought was ‘attractive’ and, for some, made them
self-conscious or unhappy with their own bodies.

Ellie (14), for example, described Instagram and TikTok as being “made
for” thin people, people who looked “pretty”, and people who were able to
dance.

Lara (13) had a similar opinion, speaking about all the “skinny influencers”
on social media – which led her to question herself when thinking about
eating certain foods.

At the extreme, one young person in this sample had experienced having
an eating disorder throughout her adolescence, and she attributed at least
some of her journey to the influence of social media.

When she was 14, Carrie (now 17) was concerned about her weight and
began searching for weight loss tips and diets on social media. Carrie set
up a separate Instagram account to conceal this content from her friends
and started ‘following‘ ‘thinspiration’ accounts and posting about her own
weight loss.

It didn’t take her long to connect with a community of others engaging with
similar content, and after commenting a few times on pictures, she was
added into several WhatsApp groups that encouraged extreme dieting. She
ended up in five of these groups in which people were asking to be verbally
abused if they ate more than they had planned to or gone off-course –
so that it would encourage them to keep their discipline and reach their
‘thinspo’ goals.

Carrie now reflects that being surrounded by edited, unattainable
imagery of models, influencers and even her peers while growing up, was
instrumental in her journey and admits that she still struggles with her own
self-image. While she feels she is now better placed to recognise when she is
‘following’ posts that make her feel insecure about her body, she explained
that she would never be able to post a photo without first using filters to
change the way she looks.




62             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Children
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design      Children         Avatars   Conclusions




Pressures of validation and exposure to risks
Most of the children we interviewed maintained their online profiles as
‘public’ in order to maximise their potential for ‘likes’ and ‘followers’. Many
disliked but accepted that unsolicited messages from adults were worth
putting up with for popularity and validation online.

Niomi (16) used to post a lot on Instagram. Her account was public, and she
enjoyed all the ‘likes’ and comments she got – which came in great numbers
when she’d post photos of herself in bikinis.

However, when she was on holiday in Turkey, she posted one of these
photos and put her location on it. Shortly after posting, she received a lot
of comments and messages from men in the area asking her to come and
see them. This scared her, and she decided to go through her account and
delete any revealing pictures she’d put up.

Niomi now mainly uses Snapchat and gets added by a lot of people she
doesn’t know. Whilst this can bring positive connections, like a friend she
made in America, it can also bring unwanted attention. She said she has had
older men ‘trick her’ into thinking they are her age, then when she asks for a
picture of their face to prove their age, they send one and it’s clear they’re
much older. They also sometimes send explicit photos of themselves, after
which she blocks them.

Despite all this, she still keeps her profiles public – saying she enjoys the
attention this brings. She enjoys getting the ‘likes’ and comments and the
messages saying she’s pretty – and doesn’t want to give all that up for the
few unwanted interactions she receives.


Online relationships and abuse
At the extreme, online connections can lead to negative and even abusive
situations for young people. Young people in our sample recognised the
potential risks and negatives of connecting with strangers online, even while
they maintained those kinds of relationships themselves.

At age 12, Chris (now 18) had been shy and introverted at school. He
struggled with offline friendships, and turned to apps and sites like Kik,
Omegle and Discord to make connections with others. One of the ways he
did this was by engaging in role-playing games with strangers online.

This role-playing often became sexual very quickly, and Chris ended up
entering into a number of online relationships. Most of the people he was
doing role-play with – many of whom he discovered later were adults –
“would want it to not be clean”, and were mostly “a horny guy wanting sex”.
He said he would go along with it because he wanted to please people.

He eventually got into an online relationship which consisted exclusively
of exchanging photos, which quickly became sexual. Reflecting on how he
felt at the time, Chris said: “I don’t think it was that I loved the person. I
wanted the attention I wasn’t getting in person: even though I couldn’t
get that online, it was better than what I could get offline.”

Now 18, Chris does not engage with online role-playing relationships and
has an ‘IRL’ (in real life) girlfriend and wider friendship group. However,
Chris feels like these early experiences shaped his ability to form offline
relationships and influenced what he felt were ‘normal’ social dynamics. For



63             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                            Children
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design    Children         Avatars   Conclusions




example, he felt reluctant to initiate conversation with others at his youth
group because “I don’t want to seem like I’m making advances on them.”


Living online and struggling offline
A number of the children we interviewed told us they increasingly felt more
confident engaging with other people online than in person.

The ability to curate and control what they said, the images they shared,
and the identity they displayed, meant that several young people preferred
cultivating relationships online.

Hannah (14) felt “more confident over texting [than] in person”, because
“if I do something wrong, I can just delete it.” She found the prospect of
meeting a boy in person daunting and struggled to imagine being able to
hold a conversation.

Similarly, Ellie (14) felt like she couldn’t express herself the same way “in
real life”.

       “I can call people out on if I think they’ve done
       something wrong on social media…but I can’t do that
       in real life…I feel like I’m going to mess up my words.”
       Ellie (14)


Lara (13) described herself as having social anxiety offline, saying “I think
I‘m more confident online – I like to speak to people online more than I do in
person.”

Jack (14) described how most of his friends would get into relationships
on Yubo, rather than offline. “Everybody else seems to just meet people in
person, but I think because we are all a bit more socially awkward, we find it
easier to talk to people online.”

Tod (16) admitted he found it much easier meeting and talking to people
online than in real life. He said he only had one ‘IRL’ friend whom he sees in
person. Otherwise, nearly all of his social interaction is online.

Chris (18) said that his anxiety about interacting with people offline was one
of the key drivers for the harmful relationships he had developed online.

       “It’s more scary to get in a relationship in real life
       because you’re like, do I smell ok? Am I doing
       something wrong? Am I acting weird? Online it’s just
       texting – as long as you can coherently say what you
       want at the time, it‘s fine.”
       Chris (18)




64             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                          Children
Skip to:    Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design    Children         Avatars    Conclusions




Summary

When we explored this subject with children, they told us:

     м Many spend more time online than they feel they should, and often find it
       hard to stop.

     м Social media is where all of their friends are and it’s one of their main
       windows onto the world around them. To not go on social media would feel
       like being excluded.

     м They experience validation and affirmation online in the form of ‘likes’,
       comments and connections, which shape what they do online in seeking
       them out.

     м Children seek out this affirmation and attention by creating mostly visual
       content (e.g., selfies, videos), sharing them as widely as possible with
       online networks, and by copying popular trends and behaviours of others.

     м Children had experienced unknown adults contacting and connecting with
       them online, for some resulting in abusive encounters. Others had engaged
       with content relating to weight loss online, and for one this ultimately led to
       seeing huge quantities of content promoting eating disorders.

     м Many children in this research blamed social media for negative and
       challenging experiences they had faced growing up, surrounding body
       image and relationships.




Business objectives                               Design strategies                 Outcomes for children

Social media companies want to                    Social media is designed          Children feel like they
maximise time on their product                    to engage users by making         spend too much time online
                                                  content more and more             and find it hard to stop
                                                  appealing, and reducing
                                                  friction in consumption


Social media companies                            Features are designed             Children have extensive
want to maximise the                              to promote and extend             networks and connections
reach of their product                            networks and connections,         online and to be offline
                                                  between peers and strangers,      is to feel excluded
                                                  children and adults



Social media companies                            Features are designed to          Children feel under pressure
want to maximise interaction                      encourage content creation        to get feedback and validation
on their product                                  and integrate metrics for         online, and change their
                                                  popularity and validation         behaviour to try to gain these
                                                  to promote interactivity




65              Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                          Children
SECTION 4
Avatars
How digital products
treat ‘child’ profiles
Skip to:    Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design      Children        Avatars   Conclusions




The relationship between digital products and their users is two-way. Social
media products are designed to shape behaviour. Behaviour shapes what
content the products serve, and how they are designed.

The designers we spoke to told us they design to encourage more time,
more people, more activity.

The children we spoke to said they spend more time than they think they
should, they feel like social media is where they can access everyone and
everything, and they feel pressure to get validation in the form of ‘likes’,
comments, and followers.

We know that some children have negative experiences online, but it is harder
to explore what role the digital products themselves are directly playing.

This is not an experiment that can be run with real children. Manipulating
their experience to test negative impact would not be ethical, and
witnessing potential negative outcomes occur to children in the real world
needs to be responded to with safeguarding and intervention.

So, we ran a series of experiments to test a ‘child’s eye’ view when using
social media apps and sites, using what we call avatars.


What are social media ‘avatars’

Avatars are a proxy for a real child: profiles set up on social media apps that
mimic the activities and experiences of real children.

We set up a series of avatars that mimicked the online profiles of real
children who took part in the interviews for this project. We carefully
controlled the inputs (their profile, what they followed, what they ‘liked’) and
observed what happened.

A key advantage of using avatars is that we can observe potentially harmful
situations (e.g., a ‘child avatar’ being exposed to inappropriate content
online) without raising safeguarding concerns, as the risk has not occurred to
a genuine child.

However, conducting this type of research activity does not happen in a
vacuum, and the presence of our avatars in the online world has the potential
to shape the experiences of other people, including children. As a result, we
set very strict ethical boundaries around what our avatars would and would
not do, so as to not introduce undue risk to other users on social media.
Examples of the measures we took included:

     м Not ‘following’ or befriending any private accounts of other children, to
       minimise the chance of any impact on genuine child users on the app

     м Not ‘liking’ or ‘following’ any illegal or obviously harmful content,
       which may make it more likely to be seen by or recommended to
       profiles of other young people

     м Not interacting with or messaging any other profiles, which would be
       under false pretences as a child profile


We also introduced a safeguarding protocol in the event that we might be
sent illegal content by another profile, e.g., child abuse imagery. These
protocols were thankfully never needed during the avatars research.


67              Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                            Avatars
Skip to:    Introduction            Designers           Deconstructing design                Children        Avatars     Conclusions




Method overview

We based avatars on real children
Each avatar was profiled on a child that took part in the qualitative phase of
the research. No identifiable data was used to profile the avatars. The data
used to profile each avatar included:




Type of data                   How it was used                                       Example
                               for an avatar

Pseudonym                      A false name not linked to the                        A profile was registered with the name
                               real child was used to register the                   Justin, a pseudonym to represent
                               account and displayed in the bio                      a respondent we call James (also a
                                                                                     pseudonym) who took part in the research


Age                            The age of the real child was                         The profile of Justin was registered aged
                               used to register the profile                          14, the real age of respondent James
                               and displayed in their bio


A sample                       400 profiles that were followed by                    The profile of Justin followed 400 other
of profiles                    the real child, sampling only profiles                profiles that were followed in real life
                               with 5000+ followers, non-personal                    by James, including boxers and other
to follow
                               meme or fan pages, or those who                       athletes, models, finance influencers,
                               were verified by the app (e.g., ‘blue                 meme accounts20 and some brands
                               tick’ verified on Instagram)19


Typical online                 The types of behaviour the real child                 James told us about the kinds of content he
behaviours                     had told us they did online – ‘liking’,               ‘liked’ and followed (in particular sporting and
                               ‘following’ and searching for the kind                fitness content and photos of female models)
to replicate
                               of content they told us they viewed
                                                                                     During different phases of the avatar these
                                                                                     types of behaviours were replicated




19 A verified badge is a check that appears next to an Instagram account’s name in search and
   on the profile. It means Instagram has confirmed that an account is the authentic presence of
   the public figure, celebrity or global brand it represents.
20 Accounts that exclusively post memes and other reshared or viral content, rather than
   representing the profiles and personal lives of real people



68              Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                                      Avatars
Skip to:    Introduction            Designers            Deconstructing design               Children        Avatars        Conclusions




We conducted four stages for each avatar to test
different types of input and hypotheses.




     1                         2                                           3                                      4
Passive                     ‘Liking’ and                               'Liking' and                          Searching for
phase                       ‘following’ content                        'following'                           content relating
                            at random                                  content relating                      to experiences
Before any
profiles had
                                                                       to experiences
                            After 400 profiles had been
been followed.              followed based on the
                            real child’s behaviour.



Scrolled                    Five minutes per day spent:                Six minutes per                       Six minutes per
through the                                                            day spent:                            day spent:
recommended                 Scrolling through the
content                     recommended content21                      Scrolling through the                 Searching for hashtags
feed for five                                                          recommended content                   and profiles in line with
                            ‘Liking’ three to four                                                           content children told us
minutes a day
                            posts from followed                        ‘Liking’ two posts                    they had engaged with
Not ‘liking’ or             accounts per day                           from followed                         on social media – e.g.,
‘following’                                                            accounts per day                      #porn when children
                            ‘Following’ two to three
any content                                                                                                  had told us they’d seen
                            profiles recommended                       ‘Liking’ three pieces of
                                                                                                             porn on the app
                            by the app per day                         content recommended
                                                                       by the app per day                    Scrolling through
                            Content and accounts were
                                                                                                             the recommended
                            selected at random from                    ‘Following’ two profiles
                                                                                                             content feed for five
                            the range of content served /              recommended by
                                                                                                             minutes a day
                            recommended to the avatar                  the app per day

                                                                       Content and accounts
                                                                       were selected in line
                                                                       with content children
                                                                       told us they had
                                                                       engaged with on
                                                                       social media, including
                                                                       weight loss and fitness,
                                                                       sexualised content,
                                                                       ‘dark humour’




21 On Instagram the ‘explore feed’ generates recommended content (in contrast to the ‘home
   feed’ of content posted only by accounts you follow). On TikTok the ‘For You’ page is a feed
   of recommended content.



69               Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                                     Avatars
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design            Children        Avatars      Conclusions




Avatars were proactively
contacted by strangers



Throughout all phases




What we set out to test:                                            What we did:                   What we saw:
What kinds of contact do avatars receive                            Gave the avatar a              Multiple direct messages
from other users on the social media                                pseudonym, age,                from strangers, mostly adults,
product? Who contacts them, how many,                               ‘follow’ list                  some including sexual content
and with what kinds of message/content?




Most avatars were proactively contacted by unknown adults within days,
many within hours of sign-up. In many cases this involved being added to
group chats with a range of other unknown profiles.


Direct messages
All ten of the Instagram child avatars were directly messaged by accounts
they did not follow. This included being added to group chats by strangers
with other adults. The apparent motives behind these messages varied, but
included promoting websites with paid-for porn content, promoting brands
or pages as well as offers to ‘collaborate’ in promoting products.

All four male child avatars and two female child avatars on Instagram were
added to group chats by people they didn’t know, in which there were multiple
other strangers with links to paid-for porn sites or pornographic dating sites.

A day after we followed the accounts sampled from the real respondent (pseudonym
James) that avatar Justin was based on – the 14-year-old avatar received three
separate direct messages linking to websites that offered paid-for porn.




70             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                                  Avatars
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children        Avatars   Conclusions




Within two days, all four of the male avatars had received messages with
links to paid-for porn in them.

Another common reason avatars were sent direct messages was to promote
products or other Instagram pages. Three of the female avatars were
messaged by music accounts, one thanking Ciara (17) and Claire (17) for
‘following’ their account, with the other messaging Laura (13) promoting
their music.

The only male avatar to receive direct messages promoting products was
Jordan (14) who was sent a message promoting basketball shoes.

Both Ciara (17) and Claire (17) were sent a message asking them to “collab”
with a clothing brand, three days after ‘following’ the accounts the real
children had followed.

Owen (15) and Claire (17) both received the same message from a DJ
asking them to ‘follow’ their page and to promote them after five days of
‘following’ the accounts the real children had followed.




71             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Avatars
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children        Avatars   Conclusions




Being followed
As soon as the avatars followed the accounts the real children followed, they
were themselves followed by multiple accounts. Several of these pages were
unknown adult profiles.

After three days of spending five minutes a day on Instagram, ‘liking’ three
posts randomly and ‘following’ two Instagram recommended pages, Jordan
(14) and Justin (14) were followed by accounts advertising cannabis sales
(below left). Jordan (14) was also followed by two profiles (below middle)
posting sexual images.

After two days of spending five minutes a day on Instagram, ‘liking’ three
posts randomly and ‘following’ two Instagram recommended pages, Oscar
(15) and Owen (15) were both followed by pages that featured dark humour
memes, and racist and derogatory content (below right).




72             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Avatars
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children        Avatars      Conclusions




Avatars were quickly recommended more of
whatever they engaged with



Phase 2: ‘Liking’ and ‘following’ content at random




What we set out to test:                       What we did:                    What we saw:
How does the content                           Five minutes scrolling          Social media products quickly adapt the
recommended and served                         per day, ‘liking’ three to      content that they recommend (e.g., in
to avatars change according                    four posts from followed        the ‘explore feed’ on Instagram or the
to what they engage with                       accounts, ‘following’           ‘For You’ page on TikTok) in response to
if they ‘like’ and 'follow’                    two to three accounts at        what the avatar shows interest in, and
content at random?                             random from those that          recommend new accounts to ‘follow’
                                               were recommended to the         based on the avatar‘s engagement,
                                               avatar by the platform          regardless of avatar registered age




Phase 3: ‘Liking’ and ‘following’ content relating to experiences




What we set out to test:                       What we did:                    What we saw:
How does the content                           Six minutes scrolling per       Social media products quickly adapt the
recommended and served to                      day, ‘liking’ two posts         content that they recommend (e.g., in
avatars change according to                    from followed accounts,         the ‘explore feed’ on Instagram or the
what they engage with, when                    ‘liking’ three recommended      ‘For You’ page on TikTok) in response
they ‘like’ and ‘follow’ content               posts, ‘following’ two          to what the avatar shows interest in and
related to what children told                  recommended accounts            recommend new accounts to ‘follow’
us they engaged with?                          all in line with content        based on the avatar‘s engagement
                                               children told us they had       – including weight loss and fitness,
                                               engaged with on social          sexualised content and ‘dark humour’,
                                               media, including weight         regardless of avatar registered age
                                               loss and fitness, sexualised
                                               content, ‘dark humour’




73             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Avatars
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design          Children           Avatars          Conclusions




At the beginning of phase two of each avatar, we followed 400 profiles
in line with what the real children had told us they followed – e.g., bands,
influencers, sports.

This immediately impacted on the avatars’ ‘explore’ feed of recommended
content. For example, as soon as avatars followed accounts on Instagram,
their ‘explore’ feed started to recommend content similar to what the avatar
appeared to have an interest in (based on what it followed).


How Owen’s (15) ‘explore’ feed
changed through each phase
     м Before any profiles were ‘followed’, Instagram mainly recommended
       scenic travel, nature and architecture photography.

     м In phase two, after ‘following’ 400 accounts based on the real child‘s
       profile and ‘liking’/‘following’ content recommended by Instagram,
       the ‘explore’ feed filled more with food and baking, memes, and some
       photos of topless men.

     м In phase three, after ‘liking’ and ‘following’ content in line with what
       the real child told us they had engaged with on social media (e.g.,
       posts from models, musicians, meme accounts), the ‘explore’ feed
       filled with many more sexualised photos of women as well as more of
       men.




‘Explore’ feed for Owen (15) avatar




‘Explore’ feed during phase one,                  ‘Explore’ feed during phase two,               ‘Explore’ feed during phase
before ‘following’ any accounts                   after ‘following’ 400 accounts                 three, ‘liking’ and ‘following’ what
                                                  and ‘liking’ and ‘following’ what              Instagram recommends in line with
                                                  Instagram recommends at random                 what the real child engaged with




74             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                                   Avatars
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design                 Children           Avatars          Conclusions




How Jordan’s (14) ‘explore’ feed
changed through each phase
     м Before any profiles were ‘followed’, the ‘explore’ feed contained
       mostly generic scenic imagery.

     м During phase two, after ‘following’ 400 accounts based on the real
       child‘s profile and ‘liking’/‘following’ content recommended by
       Instagram, Jordan’s feed filled with a lot of images of boxers and
       sports celebrities as well as photos of women in lingerie or swimwear.

     м During phase three, where we ‘liked’ and ‘followed’ more
       recommended content aligned with what the real child told us they
       had engaged with (e.g., posts from boxers, models, meme accounts),
       images of women became the dominant content, featuring more
       seemingly heavily edited body shapes.




‘Explore‘ feed for Jordan (14) avatar




‘Explore’ feed during phase one,                  ‘Explore’ feed during phase two,                      ‘Explore’ feed during phase
before ‘following’ any accounts                   after ‘following’ 400 accounts, ‘liking’              three, ‘liking’ and ‘following’ what
                                                  and ‘following’ what Instagram                        Instagram recommends in line with
                                                  recommends at random                                  what the real child engaged with



Recommended content in Jordan's ‘explore’ feed during phase three




75             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                                          Avatars
Skip to:    Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design                 Children           Avatars          Conclusions




How Ciara’s (17) ‘explore’ feed changed
throughout each phase
     м Before ‘following’ any profiles, Instagram mainly recommended
       similarly generic scenic travel, nature and architecture photography.

     м In phase two, after ‘following’ 400 accounts based on the real child‘s
       profile and ‘liking’/‘following’ content recommended by Instagram, the
       ‘explore’ feed filled more with celebrity content, astrology posts and
       hair and beauty tips.

     м In phase three, after ‘liking’ and ‘following’ content in line with what
       the real child told us they had engaged with on social media (e.g.,
       Youtubers, musicians, fitness), the ‘explore’ feed started to feature
       more weight loss and fitness related content.




‘Explore’ feed for Ciara (17) avatar




‘Explore’ feed during phase one,                   ‘Explore’ feed during phase two,                      ‘Explore’ feed during phase
before ‘following’ any accounts                    after ‘following’ 400 accounts, ‘liking’              three, ‘liking’ and ‘following’ what
                                                   and ‘following’ what Instagram                        Instagram recommends in line with
                                                   recommends at random                                  what the real child engaged with




76              Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                                          Avatars
Skip to:    Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design            Children           Avatars          Conclusions




Deep dive: Unpacking how and why Ciara’s
‘explore’ feed changed over time
     м During phases one and two, Ciara’s (17) avatar did not ‘like’ or ‘follow’
       any posts or profiles relating to fitness or weight loss.

     м During phase three, Ciara’s Instagram explore feed served a
       recommended post from a sportswear brand, ‘gymtears’, posting
       about diets – the avatar ‘liked’ this post.

     м On the same day, Ciara’s Instagram ‘explore’ feed served a post by an
       account called ‘inspiring.weightloss’ showing a pre- and post-weight
       loss journey – the avatar ‘followed’ this account.

     м After this, Ciara’s ‘explore’ feed began to feature more content
       relating to weight loss journeys and tips, exercise and body sculpting,
       and featuring noticeably slim, and in some cases seemingly edited/
       distorted body shapes.


Ciara’s (17) avatar was based on the respondent with the pseudonym Carrie.
Carrie had experienced a similar journey with Instagram to what we saw
here, with the app recommending more weight loss and fitness content the
more she engaged with it.

While 17 at the time of interview, Carrie was younger when she described
this taking place. We wanted to test whether the app would respond
differently to a younger registered age, so we replicated the activities with
an avatar registered as 15, named Charlotte.

Charlotte’s (15) avatar was similarly recommended accounts and posts
relating to weight loss and fitness. After ‘following’ and ‘liking’ a selection of
these, the ‘explore’ feed filled with more similar content promoting weight
loss journeys, fitness ‘before and after’ comparisons, dieting tips or photos
of women emphasising their slimness or weight.




Post from ‘gymtears’ recommended                   Avatar ‘likes’ post from ‘gymtears’              Avatar immediately recommended
by Instagram to Ciara (17)                                                                          ‘suggested for you’ similar accounts to
in her ‘explore’ feed                                                                               follow, relating to fitness and exercise

77              Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                                     Avatars
Skip to:   Introduction            Designers           Deconstructing design     Children           Avatars         Conclusions




Post from ‘inspiring.weightloss’                  Avatar ‘follows’ the account              Avatar immediately recommended
recommended by Instagram to                       ‘inspiring.weightloss}’                   ‘suggested for you’ similar accounts
Ciara (17) in her ‘explore’ feed                                                            to follow, relating to weight loss



‘Explore’ feed for Ciara (17) after ‘following’ ‘inspiring.weightloss’ and ‘liking’ ‘gymtears’




Charlotte‘s (15) ‘explore’ feed after ‘liking’ and ‘following’ posts
recommended by Instagram relating to fitness and weight loss




78             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                              Avatars
    CONTENT WARNING:
SCREENSHOTS FROM SOCIAL MEDIA IN THIS SECTION OF THE
REPORT INCLUDE CONTENT PROMOTING EATING DISORDERS,
    SELF-HARM, SUICIDE AND OFFENSIVE LANGUAGE.
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children        Avatars      Conclusions




Avatars were easily able to search for and
access content relating to eating disorders,
suicide, self-harm, and sexual images



Phase 4: Searching for content relating to experiences




What we set out to test:                       What we did:                    What we saw:
What types of content can be                   Searched terms in line          Access to relevant content – e.g., pro-
searched for and viewed by                     with types of content           anorexia, self-harm, sexualised content
avatars registered with the                    children told us they’d
social media site as children?                 seen (e.g., ‘thinspiration’)




Some children we interviewed told us they had seen and engaged with
content such as posts promoting eating disorders and self-harm on social
media. Often this content, as described by the children, would contravene
the community guidelines of the social media companies themselves.

To see how easy it was for children to access this type of content, from phase
four we began conducting ‘search experiments’ using specified keywords to
observe what content was made available to the avatars.

Examples included searching the term ‘skinny’. While a pop-up window
appears, by selecting ‘show posts’ the avatars were offered accounts
promoting eating disorders and diets, as well as pages advertising appetite-
suppressant gummy bears.




80             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Avatars
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design               Children         Avatars   Conclusions




  Clara‘s (15) avatar searching #skinny on Instagram




                                                                               ‘skinny.quick’ account on
                                                                               Instagram promoting a website
                                                                               selling ‘fat burner’ and ’breast
                                                                               enhancer’ gummy bears




Other child avatars searched terms that aligned with content that children
in the research had told us they had seen on social media apps and sites,
including ‘thin’, ‘bodygoals’, ‘porn’, ‘darkmemes’, ‘suicide’ and ‘proanaa’
(proana with one ‘a’ is blocked by Instagram, but adding a second ‘a’ unlocks
access to pro-anorexia content).




81             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                                      Avatars
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children        Avatars   Conclusions




Ciara‘s (17) avatar searching #thin on TikTok




Ciara‘s (17) avatar searching #skinny on TikTok




Justin‘s (14) avatar searching ‘bodygoals’ on Instagram




82             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Avatars
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children        Avatars   Conclusions




Jordan‘s (14) avatar searching ‘porn’ on Instagram




Oscar‘s (15) avatar searching ‘darkmemes’ on Instagram




Ciara‘s (17) avatar searching ‘proanaa’ and ‘proannna’ on Instagram




83             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Avatars
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children        Avatars   Conclusions




Laura‘s (13) avatar searching ‘suicide’ on Instagram




Social media companies know the age of
avatars – they serve them child-targeted
adverts
While scrolling through the ‘home feed’ of content on Instagram, the app
regularly served adverts interspersed with the content shown to child
avatars. These included adverts for:

     м A schoolwork revision app

     м Roblox game

     м Government campaign for T-levels education

     м A Home Office ‘Something’s Not Right’ campaign aimed at young
       people for recognising and reporting abuse

     м An online sweetshop

     м A teen–targeted tampon campaign

     м Nintendo Switch console


Many of these adverts were evidently targeted at the registered age of the
avatar or more broadly at children.

The social media companies evidently know that the avatar profiles are
children for the purposes of serving them targeted advertising.




84             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Avatars
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children        Avatars   Conclusions




Jordan‘s (14) avatar was served sexual content alongside
adverts for Roblox and a school revision study app




Owen‘s (15) avatar was served sexual content alongside adverts for T-levels and
a Home Office campaign for recognising and reporting child abuse online




Laura‘s (13) avatar was able to search for ‘depressed’ theme content, while also being
served adverts for a sweetshop, Nintendo Switch and a teen targeted-tampon advert




85             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Avatars
Skip to:    Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children        Avatars   Conclusions




Summary

When we used avatars – ‘proxy’ children’s profiles set up on social media that
mirrored the age, interests, and behaviour of real children – we saw that:

     м Child-aged avatars were exposed to significant quantities of
       unsolicited contact from unknown adults, including the sharing of
       sexual content.

     м Avatars were quickly recommended and served more of whatever
       they seemingly ‘paid attention to’ (by clicking, ‘liking’ or ‘following’).
       This applied to a range of content – such as celebrity or sport, but also
       included content related to weight loss promotion, fitness, dieting and
       sexualised content.

     м When child-aged avatars searched for content (based on the
       experiences of real children in the research) such as promotion of
       eating disorders or self-harm, they were quickly able to access this
       type of content, irrespective of their registered age. This content often
       contravened the social media company’s own community guidelines.

     м These same child-aged avatars were served age-relevant targeted
       advertising (e.g., relating to toys, school or other products aimed
       at young people), while continuing to be served sexualised images,
       content promoting eating disorders or weight loss and self-harm,
       despite social media companies knowing that these accounts were
       registered as children.




86              Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                         Avatars
SECTION 5
Conclusions
Skip to:       Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design   Children        Avatars   Conclusions




Conclusions:
     м Designers told us that they design to the objectives they are given –
           which are to increase time, users and activity on their social media
           products and services. These outcomes drive the business model
           of social media by maximising advertising revenue. They use a range
           of design strategies to make it as appealing and easy as possible for
           users to consume, connect, interact, and share.

     м Children told us that they spend more time online than they think
           they should and that they find it hard to stop. They told us that they
           rely on social media for connecting with the wider world, and they
           would feel excluded without it. They told us that they feel pressure
           to gain validation from others online in the form of ‘likes’, comments
           and followers and that they shape what they do to try to get more
           – creating, posting and sharing content that they think will get them
           that validation.

     м Some children feel that social media has played an important role in
           some of the challenges and negative experiences they have faced
           growing up. Some blame social media for driving their eating disorder
           or for facilitating abusive online relationships.

     м Avatars showed us that ‘child’ profiles are sent large volumes
           of unsolicited messages and requests from unknown users,
           including adults. They showed us that social media amplifies the
           types of content that ‘child’ profiles appear to show an interest in,
           including content focused on weight loss, fitness, dieting and highly
           sexualised imagery.

     м Avatars revealed that alongside this content, social media companies
           know the age of these ‘child’ profiles and make money from serving
           age-relevant advertising targeted for children.




88                 Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                     Conslusions
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design    Children        Avatars     Conclusions




The outcomes experienced by children in this research clearly mirror the
objectives of designers when creating social media products and services.
Companies create the architecture in which children interact and explore,
and so influence what they do.

The products are designed to shape behaviour in line with their business
objectives, and these are the same behaviours we see among many
child users of these products.




Business objectives                              Design strategies                 Outcomes for children

Social media companies want to                   Social media is designed          Children feel like they
maximise time on their product                   to engage users by making         spend too much time online
                                                 content more and more             and find it hard to stop
                                                 appealing, and reducing
                                                 friction in consumption


Social media companies                           Features are designed             Children have extensive
want to maximise the                             to promote and extend             networks and connections
reach of their product                           networks and connections,         online and to be offline
                                                 between peers and strangers,      is to feel excluded
                                                 children and adults



Social media companies                           Features are designed to          Children feel under pressure
want to maximise interaction                     encourage content creation        to get feedback and validation
on their product                                 and integrate metrics for         online, and change their
                                                 popularity and validation         behaviour to try to gain these
                                                 to promote interactivity




For some, these pressures have contributed to challenging and harmful
experiences, including issues with body image, eating disorders and abusive
online relationships.




89             Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                      Conslusions
ANNEX 1
Design
strategies
in the digital
world
Refining content:                                                                                  Back to strategies

Examples across digital products




91    Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk   Design strategies in the digital world
Applying time pressure:                                                                            Back to strategies

Examples across digital products




92    Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk   Design strategies in the digital world
Building anticipation:                                                                             Back to strategies

Examples across digital products




93    Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk   Design strategies in the digital world
Reducing friction:                                                                                 Back to strategies

Examples across digital products




94    Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk   Design strategies in the digital world
Attaching value:                                                                                   Back to strategies

Examples across digital products




95    Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk   Design strategies in the digital world
Quantifying:                                                                                       Back to strategies

Examples across digital products




96    Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk   Design strategies in the digital world
Rewarding:                                                                                         Back to strategies

Examples across digital products




97    Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk   Design strategies in the digital world
Making it easy to connect:                                                                         Back to strategies

Examples across digital products




98    Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk   Design strategies in the digital world
Making it easy to interact:                                                                        Back to strategies

Examples across digital products




99    Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk   Design strategies in the digital world
Making it easy to share:                                                                           Back to strategies

Examples across digital products




100   Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk   Design strategies in the digital world
ANNEX 2
Interview
sample
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design             Children        Avatars       Conclusions




   Pseudonym               Digital use                              Biography



                           Key digital products:                    Ken is 12. He lives with his mum, dad, and brother in
                           Instagram (daily)                        Leicester. The family are very close and often go out for day
                           Twitter (daily)                          trips together, doing things like swimming, bowling, and
                           Fortnite (daily)                         crazy golf. Ken’s biggest ambition in life is to be a DJ and
      Ken,22 12            Twitch (daily)                           he spends a lot of his free time trying to pursue this goal.
                           Facebook (rarely)                        His dad is also an aspiring DJ, and they sometimes perform
                                                                    together on a local radio show. Ken predominantly uses his
                                                                    social media as a way of promoting his DJ persona. However,
                                                                    his social media is heavily controlled by his parents, who have
                                                                    access to all of his accounts and can see all of his messages
                                                                    and interactions. The bio sections of his profiles often state
                                                                    that he is ‘Parent-Managed’ to discourage anyone from
                                                                    sending him anything explicit or trying to take advantage
                                                                    of him.



                           Key digital products:                    Lara is 13 and lives in Edmonton, north London, with her
                           TikTok (daily)                           mum and dad. Lara goes to her local girls’ school and
                           Instagram (daily)                        struggles to find anything she likes about school. She spends
                           Snapchat (daily)                         a lot of time on social media, especially TikTok. During
       Lara, 13                                                     lockdown she would sometimes stay up until 5am on her
                                                                    phone. She likes funny videos where people make jokes to
                                                                    lyrics of songs, social justice issues and astrology posts. Lara
                                                                    prefers to talk to people over social media than in person
                                                                    because she likes to have time to think about how to reply.



                           Key digital products:                    Sam is 14, and lives in Kent with his mum. Sam has been
                           Xbox (daily)                             diagnosed with autism. He often struggles to get to sleep
                           YouTube (daily)                          on time – frequently going to bed at 3 or 4am – and will miss
                           Twitch (daily)                           school as a result. Although he doesn’t have social media (as
       Sam, 14                                                      his mum told him it wasn’t safe), gaming dominates his life – it
                                                                    is where he spends all his time, and where the majority of his
                                                                    socialising happens.



                           Key digital products:                    Otis is 14 and lives in Islington, north London. Otis is a
                           Twitch (daily)                           thoughtful person with varying interests, but his main
                           Twitter (daily)                          passion is playing and consuming content about video
                           Discord (daily)                          games. He likes to watch explainer videos and live streams
       Otis, 14            YouTube (daily)                          produced by gamers on YouTube and Twitch. Otis likes to
                           Snapchat (daily)                         play character-based games online with his friends.




22 All names have been changed to maintain anonymity



102            Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                          Interview sample
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design             Children        Avatars        Conclusions




   Pseudonym               Digital use                              Biography



                           Key digital products:                    Ellie lives with her mum, dad, and elder sister in Cambridge.
                           Snapchat (daily)                         She likes the academic aspect of school and learning and
                           YouTube (daily)                          is particularly interested in creative subjects such as art
                           Instagram (daily)                        and photography. She missed large portions of school
       Ellie, 14           Twitter (weekly)                         throughout Years 7 and 8 as she struggled with emetophobia
                                                                    (phobia of vomiting) and anxiety. During this time, she spent
                                                                    a lot more time online, connecting with people via games
                                                                    and social media.



                           Key digital products:                    Jack is 14. He lives with his mum, stepdad, and stepbrother
                           Yubo (daily)                             in a remote rural area on the edge of Welshpool. His home
                           Snapchat (daily)                         is very isolated, with little access to public transport. This
                           TikTok (daily)                           means that the only way he is able to see his friends is by car,
       Jack, 14                                                     or more often, online. As a result, he spends a lot of time on
                                                                    social media. Jack divides his time online between scrolling
                                                                    through Instagram, watching videos on TikTok, connecting
                                                                    with new people on Yubo and adding people on Snapchat in
                                                                    his local area in order to increase the number of Bitmojis that
                                                                    appear on his Snap Maps.



                           Key digital products:                    James is 14, and lives with his mum, dad, younger sister, and
                           TikTok (daily)                           younger brother in Belfast. James does not particularly enjoy
                           Instagram (daily)                        school and wants to become a professional boxer when he
                           Snapchat (daily)                         leaves. James is keen to use his Instagram account to build
      James, 14            PS4 (daily)                              his profile as a boxer, and also hopes to be sponsored by a
                                                                    sportswear brand in the future. He also enjoys using TikTok
                                                                    and playing online games with his friends on his PS4.



                           Key digital products:                    Hannah lives in Newtownabbey, Belfast with her mum,
                           TikTok (daily)                           brother, and younger sister. However, she moved around a
                           Snapchat (daily)                         lot throughout her childhood. She was very shy and found
                           Facebook (daily)                         being a teenager hard. She sees a lot of content about
      Hannah, 14           Instagram (recently                      people bringing attention to their own mental health issues
                           deleted)                                 on social media, which she finds difficult to see as she has
                                                                    mental health issues of her own. She found herself able to be
                                                                    “more confident over texting [than] in person”, as if she “does
                                                                    something wrong you can just delete it”. When she met up
                                                                    with a boy for the first time after they’d been Snapchatting,
                                                                    she was so shy that she didn’t know what to say.




103            Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                          Interview sample
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design             Children         Avatars       Conclusions




   Pseudonym               Digital use                              Biography



                           Key digital products:                    Wendy lives with her mum and sister in Glasgow. The
                           Snapchat (daily)                         majority of Wendy’s friends are from her local area and go
                           TikTok (daily)                           to the same school as her. She is interested in music and
                           YouTube (daily)                          likes ‘following’ her favourite artists on social media. She is
      Wendy, 15            Facebook (weekly)                        very tuned in to the drama that happens at school between
                                                                    different social groups. This drama continued on Snapchat
                                                                    during the first lockdown when her school was closed.
                                                                    Wendy also once engaged with eating disorder content on
                                                                    social media and was subsequently added to group chats
                                                                    which encouraged people to eat less.



                           Key digital products:                    Otto is 15 and lives with his mum and dad in north Wales.
                           Omegle (daily)                           Otto has struggled with anxiety and some behavioural
                           Instagram (daily)                        issues, resulting in him only going to school on a part-time
                           Discord (daily)                          basis. He has recently become estranged from most of his
      Otto, 15             Snapchat (daily)                         friends as he thinks they’ve changed and he doesn’t like
                           TikTok (daily)                           them any more. He now spends all his time online, spending
                                                                    about 13 hours a day on his phone, and 9 hours gaming.
                                                                    Otto often spends his time online looking for connection and
                                                                    stimulus and says he doesn’t get this in his offline life.



                           Key digital products:                    Katie is 15 and lives in a small village near Birmingham with
                           Instagram (daily)                        her parents and older brothers. Katie prefers to hang out
                           Snapchat (daily)                         with the boys at school as she often finds the girls to be
                           TikTok (daily)                           judgemental and hard to trust. Like many young people,
      Katie, 15            Yubo (weekly)                            Katie has a main Instagram account and a spam account.
                                                                    On her main Instagram she only posts ‘really good’ pictures,
                                                                    ones that she is proud of. A good photo, she says, will get
                                                                    around one like per minute from when it’s posted. Katie has
                                                                    had multiple adult men message her on Instagram asking her
                                                                    if she wants to move to India and meet them. She also likes
                                                                    Snap Maps because she likes that people can see where she
                                                                    is and what she is up to.




104            Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                           Interview sample
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design              Children        Avatars         Conclusions




   Pseudonym               Digital use                              Biography



                           Key digital products:                    Alara is 15 and lives with her parents and two younger
                           Instagram (daily)                        brothers in Edmonton, north London. Alara loves shopping
                           Snapchat (daily)                         and make-up and is generally very conscious of how she
                           TikTok (daily)                           looks. She says this is a result of seeing influencers and
      Alara, 15                                                     Instagram models on social media, who make her feel like
                                                                    she needs to spend more time thinking about how she looks.
                                                                    Alara would like to post more on social media but is never
                                                                    satisfied with her photos. Even when she does post a photo
                                                                    online, she soon takes it down as she says that the more she
                                                                    sees the photo, the less she likes it. Alara also uses filters that
                                                                    smooth out her skin and will sometimes use editing apps to
                                                                    touch up her photos.



                           Key digital products:                    Dan is 15 and lives with his mum in Walthamstow, north
                           Discord (daily)                          London. Dan is a shy, introverted person who likes to spend
                           YouTube (daily)                          time on his own creating comics – writing the stories and
                           WhatsApp (daily)                         drawing the characters. He’s interested in action, fantasy and
       Dan, 15                                                      sci-fi, so he plays a lot of games that reflect those interests
                                                                    and likes joining role play servers on chat sites too. Dan
                                                                    doesn’t see his friends outside of school as much as he used
                                                                    to, as he’s happier spending time on his own – working on his
                                                                    characters, chatting online, and playing his games.



                           Key digital products:                    Cornelia is 15 she lives with her mum in Brentford, north
                           Snapchat (daily)                         London. She says she goes to a very strict school and
                           Instagram (daily)                        her parents have high expectations of her, which results
                           YouTube (daily)                          in her feeling a lot of pressure. She worries a lot about
   Cornelia, 15            TikTok (daily)                           disappointing her parents, but she also wants to be a
                                                                    teenager and be out with her friends. Cornelia uses Snapchat
                                                                    throughout the day to see what her friends are doing and
                                                                    explained that she will leave people ‘unread’ if she wants to
                                                                    show them that she is annoyed with them. While Cornelia
                                                                    said she felt confident in the way she looked, she used filters
                                                                    when she posted on Instagram to smooth her skin and give
                                                                    the image a warmer glow. She also mentioned that her
                                                                    ‘ideal body’ would be that of Cardi B or Beyoncé and that
                                                                    sometimes she feels insecure about her own body after
                                                                    seeing their posts on Instagram.




105            Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                           Interview sample
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design             Children        Avatars       Conclusions




   Pseudonym               Digital use                              Biography



                           Key digital products:                    Matilda lives in Cambridge with her mum, dad, and grandma
                           Snapchat (daily)                         – as her older brother and sister have gone to university. She
                           Instagram (daily)                        is very confident and sociable, and is particularly interested
                                                                    in drama – taking part in many productions alongside other
      Matilda, 16                                                   extracurricular activities such as sports teams and dance.
                                                                    Her dream job is to be an actress, although she also loves
                                                                    animals and would like to be a vet. She’s aware of how much
                                                                    time she spends on social media, claiming she was addicted
                                                                    to Snapchat and Instagram. She recently deleted TikTok
                                                                    because “you can spend hours and hours on it, hours just
                                                                    pass, and it feels like five seconds”.



                           Key digital products:                    Darius, 16, lives in West Sussex with his mum and dad. He is
                           Snapchat (daily)                         currently studying drama at college, and also enjoys playing
                           Instagram (daily)                        basketball and going to the gym. Darius lives with ataxia,
                                                                    a degenerative nervous system disease, which has caused
      Darius, 16                                                    him significant anxiety in the past. Although he used social
                                                                    media for only a few hours a day, Darius felt there was a lot
                                                                    of pressure to ‘look perfect’ and ‘not be a virgin’ online and
                                                                    felt that his peers would do anything not to stand out or look
                                                                    ‘weird’. He also sometimes used filters to ‘smooth’ away his
                                                                    acne, particularly when talking to girls. Darius also regularly
                                                                    received messages from ‘bot’ porn accounts. Although
                                                                    he ignored these now, he described being excited and
                                                                    engaging with these when he first used Instagram at age 13.



                           Key digital products:                    Niomi, 16, lives in a flat in Glasgow with her mum and
                           Snapchat (daily)                         younger sister. She lives in the flat below one of her friends,
                           Instagram (daily)                        but most of her other friends live nearer to school, so she
                                                                    doesn’t get to see them as much. She uses social media a lot
      Niomi, 16                                                     but doesn’t post as much as she used to. At 13, recognising
                                                                    what seemed to get attention, she would post a lot of photos
                                                                    of herself on Instagram – often quite revealing ones, like
                                                                    bikini shots. She enjoyed how many comments and ‘likes’ the
                                                                    pictures received and hoped she might even get sponsored
                                                                    by a brand.




106            Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                          Interview sample
Skip to:   Introduction           Designers            Deconstructing design             Children         Avatars        Conclusions




   Pseudonym               Digital use                              Biography



                           Key digital products:                    Bob is 16, and lives outside Edinburgh with his mum, dad,
                           Twitter (daily)                          and older brother. He has ASD (autism spectrum disorder).
                           Instagram (daily)                        After his GCSEs, he began to struggle with his work as he
                           TikTok (daily)                           was no longer enjoying school. He has since started taking
       Bob, 16                                                      new subjects, including musical theatre. Having previously
                                                                    struggled, Bob has also recently strengthened his friendships
                                                                    at school and found a group he feels part of, although he
                                                                    rarely sees any peers outside of school. He has also joined a
                                                                    local theatre group and describes this as “like an escape for
                                                                    me”. Bob feels he can express himself most easily on social
                                                                    media and is part of what he calls ‘Stan Twitter’ (for fans
                                                                    of certain musicals). Bob’s two closest friends are people
                                                                    he met online, and he also enjoys trying to create popular
                                                                    TikTok videos.



                           Key digital products:                    Tod is 16. He lives with his mum, dad and younger sister in
                           Instagram (daily)                        Chelmsford, Essex. He’s been badly bullied in school for
                           YouTube (daily)                          being transgender, and also has bad anxiety, meaning he is
                           Twitch (rarely)                          only at school on a part-time basis. Tod spends a lot of time
       Tod, 16                                                      on social media, as he says he struggles with face-to-face
                                                                    interaction. It is also where he finds things that interest him,
                                                                    and where he feels he can express himself.



                           Key digital products:                    Carrie is 17 and lives in Leeds with her mum, stepdad, and
                           TikTok (daily)                           younger siblings. She is highly motivated to work hard at
                           Snapchat (daily)                         college as she wants to go to university to study psychology.
                           Instagram (daily)                        While she is happy and has a large circle of friends at college,
      Carrie, 17                                                    she previously found school much tougher and struggled
                                                                    to fit in. Carrie struggled with an eating disorder when she
                                                                    was 15 and still sometimes struggles with her body image.
                                                                    She told us that she can no longer upload a photo of herself
                                                                    without using a filter.



                           Key digital products:                    Chris, 18, lives with his mum and younger brother in
                           Instagram (daily)                        Newcastle. He was shy and seeking connection at 12, and
                           Discord (daily)                          so started role-playing on Kik, Omegle and Discord. This
                           Snapchat (daily)                         turned sexual very quickly and he entered into a number of
      Chris, 18            Kik (historically)                       online relationships, some of which ended up being coercive
                           Omegle (historically)                    and damaging.




107            Pathways: How digital design puts children at risk                           Interview sample
PATHWAYS: HOW DIGITAL DESIGN PUTS CHILDREN AT RISK




                                  Website: 5rightsfoundation.com   Email: info@5rightsfoundation.com
                                  Twitter: @5RightsFound


5Rights Foundation ©2021
