UvA DARE | Computer adaptive practice of Maths ability using a new item response model for on the fly ability and difficulty estimation

Go to home page

UvA-DARE
Digital Academic Repository

UvA-DARE

Search

Skip to main content

Home

Computer adaptive practice of Maths ability using a new item response model for on the fly ability and difficulty estimation

        Computer adaptive practice of Maths ability using a new item response model for on the fly ability and difficulty estimation

Authors

S. Klinkenberg

M. Straatemeier

H.L.J. van der Maas

Publication date

                         2011

Journal

                         Computers and Education

Volume | Issue number

                         57 | 2

Pages (from-to)

                         1813-1824

Organisations

    Faculty of Social and Behavioural Sciences (FMG) - Psychology Research Institute (PsyRes)

Abstract

In this paper we present a model for computerized adaptive practice and monitoring. This model is used in the Maths Garden, a web-based monitoring system, which includes a challenging web environment for children to practice arithmetic. Using a new item response model based on the Elo (1978) rating system and an explicit scoring rule, estimates of the ability of persons and the difficulty of items are updated with every answered item, allowing for on the fly item calibration. In the scoring rule both accuracy and response time are accounted for. Items are sampled with a mean success probability of .75, making the tasks challenging yet not too difficult. In a period of ten months our sample of 3648 children completed over 3.5 million arithmetic problems. The children completed about 33% of these problems outside school hours. Results show better measurement precision, high validity and reliability, high pupil satisfaction, and many interesting options for monitoring progress, diagnosing errors and analyzing development. 

Show more

Document type

                         Article

Language

                         English

Published at

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2011.02.003

(Final published version)

Permalink to this page

Back

 University library

 Disclaimer

 Terms of Use

 Contact

 About UvA-DARE

          Copyright UvA 2026

To top