       Includes Extensive                     Second Edition
       Online Video



                        Children’s
                        Mathematics
                        Cognitively
                        Guided
                        Instruction
                        Thomas P. Carpenter
                        Elizabeth Fennema
                        Megan Loef Franke
                        Linda Levi
                        Susan B. Empson


                        HEINEMANN
                        Portsmouth, NH




Carpenter_book.indb i                                          9/18/14 9:40 AM
                         Heinemann
                         361 Hanover Street
                         Portsmouth, NH 03801–3912
                         www.heinemann.com

                         Offices and agents throughout the world

                         © 2015 by Thomas P. Carpenter, Elizabeth Fennema, Megan Loef Franke,
                         Linda Levi, and Susan B. Empson

                         All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by
                         any electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retrieval
                         systems, without permission in writing from the publisher, except by a reviewer,
                         who may quote brief passages in a review.

                         “Dedicated to Teachers” is a trademark of Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc.




                         Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
                         Children’s mathematics : cognitively guided instruction.—Second edition / Thomas
                         P. Carpenter [and four others].
                               pages cm
                            ISBN 978-0-325-05287-8
                            1. Mathematics—Study and teaching (Primary) I. Carpenter, Thomas P.
                         QA135.5.C4947 2014
                         372.7'044—dc23                                                       2014035840

                         Editor: Katherine Bryant
                         Production: Sonja S. Chapman
                         Typesetter: Kim Arney
                         Cover and interior designs: Suzanne Heiser
                         Manufacturing: Steve Bernier


                         Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
                         19 18 17 16 15 ML 1 2 3 4 5




Carpenter_book.indb ii                                                                                      9/18/14 9:40 AM
                 D E D I C AT I O N




             Cognitively Guided Instruction (CGI) teachers
             frequently talk about how they learn from their
             students. We have been fortunate to be able
             to learn from both teachers and their students.
             The teachers we have worked with have truly
             been partners in our research. They have helped
             to extend our understandings of children’s
             mathematical thinking, shown us what is possible
             as they support student learning in classrooms,
             and inspired us to continue our research and
             professional development.
                 We dedicate this book to all the teachers,
             children, and teacher leaders who have helped
             to make CGI what it is today. This really is their
             story, and we are grateful to them for helping
             us tell it.




Carpenter_book.indb iii                                           9/18/14 9:40 AM
                         The continuing popularity of this book is testimony to the importance of its central
                         message: Young children can think mathematically and instruction that builds on
                         their thinking takes them further and deeper into the core concepts of arithmetic
                         than teachers might imagine.
                                                                                            —James Hiebert,
                                                                    Robert J. Barkley Professor of Education,
                                                                                      University of Delaware

                         The training we have had in Cognitively Guided Instruction and through Children’s
                         Mathematics has shown us that understanding “how” children think mathematically
                         is so much more valuable to their ongoing development than trying to “give” them
                         the way to think. Our students have flourished!
                                                                                    —Kathy Goecke, principal

                         Cognitively Guided Instruction not only changed the way I teach and restored my
                         passion for teaching, it has had a positive impact on thousands of children.
                                                          —Debbie Gates, elementary mathematics specialist

                         This exemplary resource is essential for teachers, professional developers, and re-
                         searchers who are interested in understanding, supporting, and extending children’s
                         ways of reasoning.
                                                                                           —Vicki Jacobs,
                                                    Yopp Distinguished Professor of Mathematics Education,
                                                                                         UNC Greensboro

                         Children’s Mathematics is by far the most powerful and practical book that I have
                         used in my work with teachers. The potential it has to not only deepen students’ con-
                         ceptual understanding of mathematics but their teachers’ as well is unparalleled . . .
                         it is essential reading for every teacher who teaches mathematics.
                                                                                  —Andrew Jenkins, principal

                         I am far more engaged and excited about teaching math myself because Children’s
                         Mathematics helped me understand what questions to ask and what student com-
                         ments to listen for that will lead to student discovery.
                                                                                     —Lesley Wagner, teacher




Carpenter_book.indb iv                                                                                            9/18/14 9:40 AM
                CONTENTS




            Foreword by Mary M. Lindquist                                                          xiv
            Introduction to the Second Edition                                                    xviii


               1. Children’s Mathematical Thinking                                                   1

               2. Addition and Subtraction: Problem Types                                            7

               3. Addition and Subtraction: Children’s Solution Strategies                         17

               4. Multiplication and Division: Problem Types and Children’s Solution Strategies    49

               5. Beginning to Use Cognitively Guided Instruction                                  76

               6. Base-Ten Number Concepts                                                         84

               7. Children’s Strategies for Solving Multidigit Problems                            96

               8. Problem Solving as Modeling                                                     129

               9. Developing Classroom Practice: Posing Problems and Eliciting Thinking           134

               10. Developing Classroom Practice: Engaging Students with Each Other’s Ideas       153

               11. Mathematical Principles Underlying Children’s Mathematics                      173

               12. The Conceptual Basis for Cognitively Guided Instruction                        184

               13. Conclusion: Keep on Learning                                                   198


            Appendix A: The Research Base of Cognitively Guided Instruction                       200
            Appendix B: Answers to Selected Questions for Reflection                              210
            References                                                                            214




                                                                                                               v




Carpenter_fm.indd v                                                                                       9/18/14 2:13 PM
                          9
                          Developing Classroom
                          Practice: Posing Problems
                          and Eliciting Thinking
                          Teachers regularly ask, “What does a CGI classroom look like?” “What do
                          I do to make my classroom a CGI classroom?” There is no “one way” to organize your
                          classroom for CGI. However, we have observed that instruction in CGI classrooms can
                          be characterized by a set of classroom practices that are powerful for engaging children’s
                          mathematical thinking. In this chapter and the next, we describe some research-based
                          classroom practices and the principled ideas that inform them. We draw on examples
                          from a number of CGI teachers working in a variety of contexts, at different points in
                          their CGI journey. This chapter elaborates the practices of posing problems and eliciting
                          student thinking.
                             When you see CGI teachers engaging children in problem solving, the work may seem
                          effortless. However, those teachers have prepared the way for students’ engagement by
                          choosing problem contexts that are accessible, ensuring students have tools available to
                          support their thinking, encouraging students to do what makes sense to them, and mak-
                          ing sure all students have a way to get started. Thus, CGI teachers work at creating an
                          environment where students see that a range of strategies are expected and celebrated.
                          This work begins with posing problems.



     134




Carpenter_book.indb 134                                                                                            9/18/14 9:41 AM
            POSING PROBLEMS
            Prior to posing a problem, CGI teachers select a problem type and numbers that allow
            students to engage with the mathematical goals they have in mind. Choosing which prob-
            lem to pose depends on understanding the details of your students’ mathematical think-
            ing; understanding your students’ thinking requires posing problems and listening to and
            watching the strategies your students use. In getting started, posing a problem that can
            easily be directly modeled offers the greatest possibility that students will be successful.
            The more you learn about your students’ thinking, the easier it will be for you to choose
            problems and numbers to meet students’ learning needs.
                Problem posing starts with the teacher reading the problem to
            students, the class reading it together, or students reading it on their
                                                                                            If you are looking for
            own. During this initial reading, check for understanding of the                support in deciding what
            context and watch and listen to see if students can get started. As             problem to pose, try
            students begin to engage in problem solving, pay special attention to           some of the questions for
                                                                                            reflection in Chapters 3
            making sure the students know what the story is about, because stu-             (question 2), 4 (questions 3
            dents’ understanding of the story drives their strategies. Engaging the         and 4), 6 (question 4), and
            class in discussion of the problem context before reading the prob-             7 (question 3).
            lem, while reading it, or after the students have heard the problem
            can support students in making sense of the problem.
                If the problem context makes sense to students and they know what they might do
            to start on a solution, they will be able to engage in problem solving. When posing the
            problem, it can be helpful to unpack the problem with students. We use the term unpack
            to refer to engaging students in making sense of the context and the action or situation
            of the problem to ensure that all students understand the problem. When or how much
            to unpack depends on the context, the students’ experiences, and what the students
            understand about the mathematics. With younger students, it may be necessary to spend
            more time making sure that they understand the context of the problem, particularly
            the consequences of the action on the number of objects in the story. Teachers in dual
            language classes or classes where English is not some students’ primary language may
            choose to unpack in ways that ensure students have the opportunity to use their native
            language as a resource in making sense of the context. When posing a particular problem
            type for the first time, you might spend more time making sure students understand what
            is happening in the story as it relates to the mathematics involved. Or you might choose
            not to unpack as a way to assess students’ abilities to make sense of the context on their
            own. Most important, when considering when and how to unpack a problem, remember
            that the goal of unpacking is to provide opportunity for students to make sense of the
            problem context, not to walk them through how to solve the problem.



                                             Developing Classroom Practice: Posing Problems and Eliciting Thinking     135




Carpenter_book.indb 135                                                                                               9/18/14 9:41 AM
                          CLIP 9.1 Unpacking
                                                      Unpacking the Problem
                          the problem context in      In the following episode, Ms. Scott posed a problem to her
                          Ms. Scott’s class           second-graders by unpacking the problem context and having
                          http://smarturl.it/CM9.1
                                                      a discussion with students about what was happening:


                             Estabán has 71 marbles. On his way to school 39 marbles fell out of his backpack.
                             How many marbles does Estabán have left?
                             Ms. Scott asked if her students were all ready for math today, and they responded
                               with a “Yes!” She then asked, “I wonder who is in the story today?” and
                               looking at her clipboard, said, “Oh, it’s Estabán.”

                                Ms. S: Estabán, do you have marbles at home?
                                Estabán: Yes.
                                Ms. S: I had a feeling. How many do you have—a bunch, a little bit?
                                Estabán: I have 100.
                                Ms. S: [with eyes wide] Really? Do you ever bring your marbles to school?
                                Estabán: My mom told me if I take them to school, my teacher might take
                                   them away.
                                Ms. S: Well, you have a smart mom. Well, today we are going to be pretending
                                   that you brought your marbles to school. Can you all pretend with Estabán
                                   about that?
                                Students: Yes.
                                Ms. S: I am going to tell you the story and then we are going to say it together.
                                   Estabán had 71 marbles, and on his way to school, 39 marbles fell out of
                                   his backpack.
                                Estabán: Oh, man.
                                Ms. S: You had a hole in your backpack.
                                Estabán: No, I don’t.
                                Ms. S: Well, let’s all pretend you did. We want to know how many marbles Estabán
                                   had left. So I am going to say it again. [Rereads entire problem.]


                          The students repeated the problem, along with Ms. Scott, two more times. Ms. Scott then
                          asked the students if they had a way they might figure it out. When the students re-
                          sponded that they did, Ms. Scott sent them to their tables to solve the problem.




     136                  Children’s Mathematics




Carpenter_book.indb 136                                                                                             9/18/14 9:41 AM
               The Separate (Result Unknown) problem Ms. Scott created for her students to solve in-
            volved a student in the class and a situation she thought would make sense to her students.
            The power of the context in a word problem is that it draws on relationships that students
            can reason about in ways that enable them to understand the mathematics of the problem.
            The context of Ms. Scott’s problem told a story about marbles getting lost, a situation that
            was familiar to students and one that they could see as involving a separating action.
               The key to unpacking a problem with students is
            supporting students to understand the context in rela-
            tion to the mathematics of the problem. In unpacking          CLIP 9.2 Unpacking the
                                                                          problem context to personalize
            the problem, Ms. Scott did not focus on “key words,”
                                                                          the problem for a student
            the question at the end of the word problem, or what          http://smarturl.it/CM9.2
            operation students should use. She also did not discuss
            how the problem could be solved. Instead, as she posed
            the problem, she focused on what the story was about.         CLIP 9.3 Unpacking the
            She checked with Estabán about his marble collec-             problem context to help a
            tion and highlighted the hole in Estabán’s backpack           student get started
                                                                          http://smarturl.it/CM9.3
            to explain how he lost the marbles. Similar to what a
            teacher might do during a literacy activity, Ms. Scott
            engaged the students in comprehending the story.


            Students Share Ideas About a Familiar Context
            In the preceding example, Ms. Scott unpacked the problem as she posed it to the class by
            asking students questions along the way. Some teachers unpack a problem by having stu-
            dents talk to each other about the context. As we see in the next example, Mr. Torres has
            his first-graders pair share around what the story is about and then engages the students
            together in a whole-group conversation. The pair share allows more students the chance
            to verbalize their understanding of the context, and it can uncover aspects of students’
            personal experiences that the teacher needs to address, as the following example shows.
               Before reading the problem, Mr. Torres asked his students about the breakfast items
            served in the cafeteria. He called on a number of different students to share their ideas.
            Mr. Torres then told the class they were going to solve a problem about breakfast in the
            cafeteria. On the board he had written a Compare (Difference Unknown) problem:

                At breakfast in the cafeteria, 12 children ate cereal. 7 children ate eggs. How many
                more children ate cereal than eggs?




                                             Developing Classroom Practice: Posing Problems and Eliciting Thinking    137




Carpenter_book.indb 137                                                                                              9/18/14 9:41 AM
                          He read the problem to the students and had the students read the problem to him.
                          He asked the students to turn to their partner and discuss what the problem is about.
                          Mr. Torres moved around listening to the students’ discussions. He then called them
                          back together.

                                Mr. T: So who can tell me one thing about the story?
                                Senica: It is about cereal.
                                Mr. T: Okay, what do we know about the cereal? Jesus?
                                Jesus: 12 children ate it.
                                Mr. T: Yes. [to the class] How many children were eating cereal for breakfast at
                                   the cafeteria?
                                Students: 12!
                                Mr. T: What else can you tell me, someone tell me one other thing about the
                                   story. Yvette?
                                Yvette: 7 had eggs.
                                Aaron: But Mister, I had eggs and there were more people having eggs.
                                Mr. T: Yvette, you are correct, the problem says 7 children ate eggs. Aaron is saying
                                   that today he had eggs and he thinks more than 7 people had eggs. That is good
                                   noticing. But today the problem we are solving is about 7 children eating eggs so
                                   we want to pay attention to those 7 people having eggs. So, Aaron, let’s make
                                   sure we know what is going on in this problem. Jesus and Yvette told us we know
                                   that in this story, 12 children had cereal and 7 children had eggs. Do you agree
                                   with that Aaron? [Aaron agrees.] So what are we trying to find out? Arleta?
                                Arleta: How many.
                                Mr. T: How many what?
                                Arleta: How many more people had cereal.
                                Mr. T: How many more people ate cereal than ate eggs. Do you agree with Arleta?
                                Students: Yes.
                                Mr. T: So are there more children eating cereal or eggs? [Students call out,
                                   “Cereal.”] If we are trying to find out how many more people ate cereal than
                                   eggs, do you think it could be that 20 more people ate cereal than eggs?
                                   [Students call out, “No.”]
                                Brian: No, ’cause that would be too many.
                                Mr. T: Okay, Caro?




     138                  Children’s Mathematics




Carpenter_book.indb 138                                                                                                 9/18/14 9:41 AM
                    Caro: Only 12 have cereal. So that is too many.
                    Mr. T: Okay, raise your hand if you have a way to get started. If you still want to
                      talk more about it, stay here with me for a minute.


               Mr. Torres not only asked his students to pair share about the context; he also asked
            them to take the lead in describing the context. He supported Aaron to see that while
            he had particular knowledge of egg eating in the cafeteria, the problem being posed was
            about a different situation. Sometimes students draw on their experiences in ways that
            can confuse them; at other times students do not understand the context well enough
            to make sense of what is going on. In closing his problem posing, Mr. Torres posed a
            question to support students to think about the relationship between the action and the
            quantities: Could it be that 20 more people ate cereal than eggs? Students’ responses to
            this question provided insight into their understanding of the mathematical relationships
            in the problem.


            Making Sense of Problems
            One of the biggest challenges in unpacking a problem with students is that you can end
            up doing all of the mathematical work. It is easy to lead students through the problem in a
            way that provides the students a strategy to use so that students already have the answer
            before you are finished unpacking the problem. The goal of unpacking the problem is to
            support sense making around the context, not to help stu-
            dents come up with a strategy or an answer. By focusing
            unpacking on having the students explain what the story            CLIP 9.4 Ms. Byron, Ms.
                                                                               Hassay, and Ms. Grace begin
            is about, you can avoid doing too much of the work for             by posing the problem
            the students.                                                      http://smarturl.it/CM9.4
                CGI teachers have found that students gradually learn
            to make sense of the context on their own. Students learn
            that whether the problem is about monkeys or squids or about a student in the class or
            about a stranger does not make a difference in the strategy they choose. Rather, students
            learn to look for the mathematical relationships that are a part of the story and use them
            to get started on a solution.
                While the details of unpacking problems can vary, a set of principles underlies the
            unpacking in all of these instances (see Figure 9.1).




                                               Developing Classroom Practice: Posing Problems and Eliciting Thinking    139




Carpenter_book.indb 139                                                                                                9/18/14 9:41 AM
                            Principles for Unpacking Problems

                            Focus on story comprehension.

                            Attend to the connection between the story and the mathematics.

                            Support each student’s participation and access.

                            Support students to learn how to unpack problems on their own.

                            Avoid doing the mathematical work of solving the problem.

                          FIGURE 9.1




                          ELICITING STUDENT THINKING
                          Asking students, “Can you tell me how you solved that?” is a central feature of CGI
                          classrooms. The wording of the question may vary, but the underlying idea that students
                          make explicit their mathematical thinking is common to all CGI classrooms. This general
                          question, along with variations such as “What did you do?” or “Tell me about your strat-
                          egy,” is a productive way to start engaging students in explaining the strategies they used
                          to solve a problem. More specific follow-up questions support students to elaborate the
                          details of their strategy. Having a student share more details of her thinking engages the
                          student in articulating, explaining, and justifying her thinking and enables the teacher and
                          other students to understand the strategy the student used. Research shows that when
                          students are expected to describe their strategies in detail with the teacher and with each
                          other, they demonstrate higher mathematical achievement (see Webb et al. 2008 and
                          2009). Both the general initial question and the specific follow-up questions that teachers
                          ask support students in explaining their strategies.
                             You can elicit student thinking throughout problem solving in ways that seek out how
                          students solved problems or support students to complete or correct a strategy or extend
                          students’ mathematical thinking. There is no perfect sequence of questions nor can ques-
                          tions all be preplanned because supporting students to explain the details of their ideas
                          requires listening and responding to what students share. The first examples that follow




     140                  Children’s Mathematics




Carpenter_book.indb 140                                                                                              9/18/14 9:41 AM
            focus on eliciting student thinking after the students have solved the problem; the next
            section examines eliciting thinking when students’ solutions are incomplete or incorrect
            and when teachers draw from student written work. The final section looks at eliciting
            where teachers work to extend students’ mathematical thinking.




                Y         our best learning comes from your students so really listen to them
                          and be open to the many ways they will teach you.
                                                                            —Shernice Lazare, teacher


            Eliciting Student Thinking After Students
            Have Solved the Problem
            Teachers often search for the “best” question to ask in eliciting a student’s thinking. How-
            ever, it turns out there is no best question. Rather, the most productive questions follow-
            ing the initial general “Tell me what you did” are those questions that refer specifically
            to what a student shared in talk or writing. Your job is to listen and observe the details of
            the student’s strategy, and then ask him a question about something you noticed.
               For example, consider the interaction between Liz and her teacher about the follow-
            ing problem:

                Kevin has 7 dollars. He wants to save up 11 dollars to buy a toy. How much more
                money does Kevin need?

                    Liz: I got 4.
                    Ms. T: How did you figure that out, Liz?
                    Liz: I put 4 with 7 and got 11.
                    Ms. T: Tell me about the 4. What do you mean that you put it with the 7?
                    Liz: I knew that 7 and 3 is 10 and 1 more is 11 and 3 and 1 is 4.

               Liz’s initial explanation let Ms. Thompson see that Liz had arrived at a correct answer
            and she was thinking about putting the 4 with the 7. Ms. Thompson’s follow-up question
            prompted Liz to focus specifically on the 4 and describe the remainder of her strategy.
            The question supported Liz to detail her strategy so the teacher and class could see the
            specific derived fact she used.




                                              Developing Classroom Practice: Posing Problems and Eliciting Thinking    141




Carpenter_book.indb 141                                                                                               9/18/14 9:41 AM
                          Asking a Series of Follow-up Questions
                          Often one follow-up question is not enough to support the student to describe her entire
                          strategy. Sometimes you need to ask a series of questions as illustrated by the following
                          example. Kirta is solving the problem:

                             Joshua had 8 buckets of sand for his sand castle. His brother brought him 11 more
                             buckets of sand. How many buckets of sand does Joshua have now?

                                Ms. N: Kirta, how did you solve the problem?
                                Kirta: I made 8 and 11.
                                Ms. N: Okay, you made 8 and 11. Can you tell me how you made the 8?
                                Kirta: I used my cubes and counted 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and then I counted 1,
                                   2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and I got 19.
                                Ms. N: So you counted out 8 cubes and then 11 cubes. How did you use that to
                                   get 19?
                                Kirta: I counted 8 [sweeping her hand over the set of 8 cubes], 9, 10, 11, 12,
                                   13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 [pointing to each cube in the set of 11].

                             With each follow-up question, Ms. Navarro picked up a detail from Kirta’s explana-
                          tion and used that to ask her another question. Ms. Navarro asked about the 8, and
                          how Kirta counted to get to 19. Kirta could have counted her cubes in several different
                          ways. Kirta might have counted all 19 cubes in the combined set starting with 1. Or she
                          might have taken advantage of the fact that she already knew that there were 8 cubes
                          in one of the collections and started counting on at 9 to count the remaining cubes. Ms.
                          Navarro learned that Kirta started counting from the 8 in the initial group and counted
                          the second group. The follow-up questions allowed Kirta to work through explaining the
                          details of her strategy and let Ms. Navarro and the class hear Kirta describe each step
                          of her Direct Modeling strategy, which showed that she was beginning to transition to a
                          Counting strategy.
                             Following up on student explanations not only helps the teacher and other students
                          learn more about a student’s thinking, it also helps the student doing the sharing in two
                          important ways. First, sharing helps the student enhance his understanding because as
                          he verbalizes he can make and deepen connections among mathematical ideas. Second,
                          sharing allows the student and the class to learn what counts as a complete mathemati-
                          cal explanation.




     142                  Children’s Mathematics




Carpenter_book.indb 142                                                                                               9/18/14 9:41 AM
            Eliciting Student Thinking When Student
            Solutions Are Incomplete or Incorrect
            As you observe students solving problems, you will see students who are unsure about
            how to proceed. Sometimes these students are on the right track, and sometimes they
            are not. In both cases, eliciting the student’s thinking is an important way to support the
            student to engage in problem solving. How then do you
            apply the same principles about attending to the de-
            tails of the student’s strategy? You can start with what           CLIP 9.5 Ms. Byron works
                                                                               with a student who has a
            the student has done or on what the student is thinking.
                                                                               partially correct strategy
            Christi Byron encountered this issue as her students               http://smarturl.it/CM9.5
            solved a Join (Result Unknown) problem:

                Natalie has 30 jelly beans. Her mom gives her 23 more jelly beans. How many jelly
                beans does Natalie have now?
                Ms. Byron was checking in with students while they solved the problem. Samuel
                  had finished solving the problem and arrived at the answer 33 (circled on his
                  paper). Ms. Byron asked him to tell her about his thinking. (See Figure 9.2.)

                    Ms. B: Will you tell me your thinking on here, Samuel?
                    Samuel: [points to the circled tens on his paper] 10.




                    FIGURE 9.2 Samuel’s solution




                                              Developing Classroom Practice: Posing Problems and Eliciting Thinking    143




Carpenter_book.indb 143                                                                                               9/18/14 9:41 AM
                                Ms. B: 10, okay.
                                Samuel: Plus 10, plus 10, plus 3, equals 33.
                                Ms. B: Equals 33, all right, let’s read the story together.
                                Ms. B and Samuel together: Natalie has 30 jelly beans, her mom gives her 23
                                  more jelly beans. How many jelly beans does Natalie have now?
                                Ms. B: All right. So can you show me the 30 jelly beans that Natalie had?
                                Samuel: [points to his paper with his pencil where he has 3 groups of 10].
                                Ms. B: Let’s count them.
                                Samuel: [with Ms. B] 10, 20, 30.
                                Ms. B: Oh, so how many more jelly beans did her mom give her?
                                Samuel: These [points to the 3 smaller circles under the 3 tens on his paper].
                                Ms. B: Let’s read that number. How many jellybeans did her mom give her?
                                Samuel: 23.
                                Ms. B: Where is the 23 in your picture?
                                Samuel: [points to the 3 circles].
                                Ms. B: Can you count those for me?
                                Samuel: 10, 20, 21 [Counts 2 circles as tens and 1one as a one. It is not
                                  clear how Samuel solved the problem but Ms. B did notice that he was
                                  sometimes counting his circles as tens and sometimes as ones.]
                                Ms. B: [points to his 3 circles] Right here is 21? Or is that, how much is this?


                             [Ms. Byron picks up some base-ten blocks and asks Samuel to make 23 with the
                             tens and ones. She sees he is having trouble thinking about the tens in 23. So she
                             then goes on to ask him to build the 23 using just ones blocks. She leaves Samuel
                             as he is making the 23 and checks in later to see if he counted all of his initial 30
                             and the 23 he counted out with the ones blocks.]

                             Ms. Byron followed the same principles as Ms. Navarro in eliciting the details of
                          Samuel’s thinking. She asked Samuel to show her what he was doing. She listened to him
                          and watched him explain his strategy, asking very specific questions and asking him to
                          be specific in his responses. When Ms. Byron was unsure about what Samuel had on his
                          paper and how he was thinking about the problem, she asked him to reread the problem
                          with her. She asked him to be specific about where he had shown the 30 from the prob-
                          lem and then the 23. She saw he was having trouble making his 23 using tens and ones,
                          and recognized that when he made the 30, he made all 30 circles in groups of 10, so she
                          gave him ones blocks and left him to see if he could finish. In summary, she asked specific




     144                  Children’s Mathematics




Carpenter_book.indb 144                                                                                              9/18/14 9:41 AM
            questions about what he did and what he was thinking, and she referred back to the prob-
            lem and provided appropriate tools to support him to move forward in his solution.



               I   ask questions of all students (right or wrong) and encourage students
                   to give more than one explanation. I also ensure (through record
                keeping and checklists) that over time all students have an opportunity
                to share their thinking and their strategies.
                                                                                —Darlene Fish, teacher


            Eliciting Student Thinking from Student Written Work
            This same principle of asking students questions about the details of their explanations
            also applies to students’ written work. In Ms. Reid’s second-grade class, the students had
            solved a Join (Change Unknown) problem. Ms. Reid noticed that Katie had finished and
            so she asked her about her work (see Figure 9.3.).

                    Ms. R: Katie what did you find out about the Pokémon cards?
                    Katie: Her mom got her 33 more.
                    Ms. R: I see you have 28, 38, 48, 58 here [points to paper]. Can you tell me
                      about that?
                    Katie: I counted up from the 28.
                    Ms. R: Okay, what about these tens that you wrote?
                    Katie: [points to the 28] 28 to 38 is 10 and 38 to 48 is 10 and 48 to 58 is 10
                      and then I went 59, 60, 61 and that is 3.




                                                                                         FIGURE 9.3 Katie’s
                                                                                         written work




                                             Developing Classroom Practice: Posing Problems and Eliciting Thinking    145




Carpenter_book.indb 145                                                                                              9/18/14 9:41 AM
                                Ms. R: So I see how you got the 3. Where did the 30 come from?
                                Katie: 10 and 10 and 10 is 30.
                                Ms. R: Nice.

                             Alex solved the same problem, but his answer was incorrect (Figure 9.4).
                             Ms. Reid stops by Alex’s desk to check in with him.

                                Ms. R: [points to the 28 on Alex’s paper] I see you have a 28 written here. Can you
                                  tell me about what you were doing with the 28?
                                Alex: I counted from 28.
                                Ms. R: Okay, you counted from 28. Can you tell me what numbers you
                                  were counting?
                                Alex: I did 29, 30, 31 . . . 61 [pointing to the tallies on his paper].
                                Ms. R: I see. How did you get 34?
                                Alex: [points to his tallies and counts] 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 31, 32, 33, oh, 33.
                                Ms. R: So her mom gave her 33. I see you made tallies, how many groups of 5 did
                                  you have?
                                Alex: [points to the tallies of 5 one at a time] 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 6.
                                Ms. R: 6 groups of 5. How many groups of 10 are there?
                                Alex: [points to 2 groups of 5] 1, [points to 2 groups of 5] 2, [points to 2
                                  groups of 5] 3.

                             As Ms. Reid questioned Alex, he was able to fix his miscount. He also worked through
                          the details of his strategy and explained in words what he had done on paper. Alex had
                          counted on by ones, but he had grouped the ones in groups of 5, which made them easier
                          to count. He could count by fives, but when Ms. Reid asked a specific question about




                                                                                                 FIGURE 9.4 Alex’s
                                                                                                 written work



     146                  Children’s Mathematics




Carpenter_book.indb 146                                                                                               9/18/14 9:41 AM
            groups of 10, he showed that he was able to count by tens. In asking him about tens, Ms.
            Reid was able to gauge his understanding of tens and get Alex to think about the use of
            tens in his solution. The use of tens is a goal Ms. Reid has for Alex. Ms. Reid’s questioning
            gave Alex a chance to reflect on his strategy and his representation and begin to extend
            his ideas.
               In each of these examples, the teachers listened to students’ mathematical explana-
            tions and used what they heard or saw to ask a specific follow-up question to elicit more
            of the details of the student’s strategy. Sometimes the additional student explanation that
            resulted from the teacher’s questioning allowed the teacher to know what strategy the
            student used, and other times it provided more detail about a mathematical idea central
            to the strategy. Working through the explanations also gave students the opportunity to
            work through their mathematical ideas verbally and in written form, allowing them to
            synthesize and connect ideas and make sense of new mathematical ideas.
               While the students in these examples responded to the
            teachers’ questions, there can be times when students do
            not respond. When you first begin to ask students to share        CLIP 9.6 Ms. Dominguez
                                                                              works with a student who
            their strategies, your questions may be met with silence.
                                                                              has an error
            A student’s lack of response does not necessarily mean            http://smarturl.it/CM9.6
            that the student does not have a strategy to share or that
            the student is unable to share. Sometimes students do not
            know what you want to hear. Other times, students are             CLIP 9.7 Ms. Hassay works
            worried about saying something wrong.                             with a student who does not
                                                                              know how to get started
               If students do not answer your questions at first, con-        http://smarturl.it/CM9.7
            sider a different approach to eliciting their thinking. If the
            student has written something or used some tools, one
            option is to ask him if he can show you what he did. Another option is to ask the student
            to show you what she is doing while she is still solving the problem. As students show
            you how they solved the problem, you can talk about what you notice them doing to help
            them learn what it means to explain their strategy. For example, if a student starts solving
            a Join (Result Unknown) problem with 40 and 25 by placing 4 ten-rods in front of her,
            you could say, “I see that you started with 4 tens. Did you start with 4 tens?” Depending
            on the student, you could ask, “Why did you start with 4 tens?” You can also ask more
            specific questions, such as, “What did you do first when you were solving the problem?”
            “Did you use any tools, your fingers, the cubes, the pencil and paper? Can you tell me
            what you did with those?”
               Some students are able to use strategies that they can not yet explain. This may be be-
            cause a student’s verbal abilities are not yet developed in a way that supports their math-
            ematical explanation or because their understanding of the strategy is not solid enough



                                            Developing Classroom Practice: Posing Problems and Eliciting Thinking    147




Carpenter_book.indb 147                                                                                             9/18/14 9:41 AM
                          for them to produce an explanation. In supporting students to explain their strategies, it is
                          wise to be particularly careful not to encourage students to use less sophisticated strate-
                          gies just because they are easier to explain. You can support students to develop their
                          abilities to explain using the approaches shown above, and in the beginning, allow stu-
                          dents to explain a piece of their strategy and to use language that makes sense to them.

                          Eliciting Student Thinking to Extend Mathematical Ideas
                          In eliciting students’ thinking, CGI teachers also support students to extend their math-
                          ematical ideas by inviting them to go beyond what they have shared in some way. To
                          extend or build on a student’s mathematical thinking, you can ask questions, provide
                          tools, and suggest different representations to encourage the student to try a new strategy
                          or explore a new idea. Extending student thinking requires that the teacher know what
                          strategies could come next in the development of students’ mathematical thinking. In the
                          earlier example, Ms. Reid asked Alex about tens in his solution. His written work showed
                          that he could count on by ones and group them by fives to count the number of tallies
                          he made. Ms. Reid knew that developing tens would advance his strategy use and that he
                          had the beginnings of the idea in his written solution to this problem.
                             Although it is productive to support students to extend their thinking, it is not all up to
                          you as the teacher. Students extend their ideas on their own, as they explain, use different
                          tools, talk to other students, engage with other students as they share, and so on. It is also
                          important to realize that supporting students to extend their ideas is not the goal of each
                          interaction. You want to support students to extend their ideas when you see evidence
                                                             that they clearly understand the strategy they are using
                                                             and are starting to move toward using strategies at the
                          CLIP 9.8 Ms. Grace works
                          with a student to extend a         next level. Supporting students to extend their think-
                          mathematical idea                  ing works best when students see themselves in charge
                          http://smarturl.it/CM9.8           of deciding if and when to take up a new idea. This also
                                                             enables them to develop productive skills and identities
                          CLIP 9.9 Ms. Barron works          as learners of mathematics.
                          with students to extend a             Eliciting student thinking starts with regularly asking
                          mathematical idea                  students to explain their thinking. Consistently asking
                          http://smarturl.it/CM9.9
                                                             students to share their thinking, expecting each student
                                                             to do so, and accepting whatever ideas students can pro-
                          vide will help students come to understand how to do math in your class, what it means to
                          explain their mathematical ideas, and that everyone is capable of explaining mathematics.
                             As you work on developing your ability to elicit student thinking, consider the prin-
                          ciples in Figure 9.5.




     148                  Children’s Mathematics




Carpenter_book.indb 148                                                                                                9/18/14 9:41 AM
              Principles for Eliciting Student Thinking

              Consistently ask students to share their thinking.

              Find ways for each student to explain his thinking to you or other students.

              Follow up with specific questions drawing from what the student shared or did.

              Support students to work all the way through the details of their strategies.

              Ask about correct, incorrect, and incomplete strategies.

              Watch for students to tell or show you that they are ready to be supported to adapt
              their strategy or try a new one.

              Listen, observe. Try to not impose your ideas on students.

            FIGURE 9.5




               S    everal years ago, I went through my first summer session of CGI. I can
                    vividly remember being slightly overwhelmed and wondering how
                long it would take for me to be able to slip this to the side and reinstitute
                “real teaching” in my classroom. While teaching for understanding and
                not memorization made sense to me, I didn’t understand how an eight-
                year-old’s thinking was supposed to guide the direction of an entire
                lesson. I remember the first day of school that year. It was about 2:30 in
                the afternoon and amazingly enough, I had run out of all those cutesy,
                first-of-the-year, “get to know you”–type activities. I had a room full of
                second-graders ready to pounce and I had to act fast. Out of desperation,
                I gathered all my little darlings in a circle on the floor, dusted off the
                Unifix cubes, and passed them around. While I don’t remember the
                problems I gave the students, nor the strategies they used, I do remember
                their engagement—and I was surprised. Surprised that they had
                so much to say about exactly how they got their correct or incorrect




                                            Developing Classroom Practice: Posing Problems and Eliciting Thinking    149




Carpenter_book.indb 149                                                                                             9/18/14 9:41 AM
                             answers and shocked that they were so eager to share their ways of
                             solving with their peers. Even after this experience, CGI was by no means
                             cemented in my mind as one of the greatest teaching philosophies of all
                             time, like it is now. I was busy “teaching” so CGI wasn’t practiced on a
                             daily or even weekly basis at first. In the beginning, I only “did CGI” when
                             our [math] specialist was coming for a visit or when we were supposed to
                             take student work to our next CGI meeting. However, over time, the more
                             and more I practiced CGI with my students, the less generic and more
                             authentic and genuinely probing my questions became. Because of this,
                             slowly, my students’ thinking became deeper and more advanced. While
                             powerful, the change was so subtle, I’m not sure I realized it until the end
                             of the year.
                               [The] math specialist asked me to give a specific problem to my
                             students to see what they would do. When I saw the problem, I was more
                             than a little worried.

                                Rachel and her brother are making gift bags for 6 friends. Each bag has 3 pencils
                                and 2 erasers in it. How many total items are there in 1 bag? How many total
                                items are in 6 bags?


                                “Oh, come ON!” I remember thinking. This problem involves two
                             different operations, one being multiplication, and is a two-step problem
                             at that. All I could think about was how embarrassed I was going to
                             be when my students bombed this question. The numbers weren’t all
                             that large, but I thought that the overall complexity of the problem
                             would surely do them in. Well, you know what? It didn’t. In fact, they
                             did amazing. When I got back together with the specialist to look at the
                             student strategies, we were thrilled with the results. That’s when she
                             informed me that my students had just solved a fifth-grade problem. A
                             fifth-grade benchmark released item.
                                It was then that I realized how powerful the work we had been doing
                             with CGI had been. The countless questions and strategies and the hours
                             of understanding the problems and listening to student thinking had
                             paid off, and this was only a piece of the evidence. I then began reflecting




     150                  Children’s Mathematics




Carpenter_book.indb 150                                                                                             9/18/14 9:41 AM
                on the work we had done that year and thinking about those first days
                in a circle on the carpet with the Unifix cubes. I began to realize that
                because the progress my students had made was so subtle and slow, that
                it was twice as meaningful as all the fast and furious “learning” and
                intensive remediation we had done in years passed. Since then, and the
                years that have passed, I find myself thinking every day of how thankful
                I am for CGI. It not only changed my students, but it changed me, as a
                teacher, as well.
                                                                                —Tara Sanders, teacher


            USING KNOWLEDGE OF CHILDREN’S
            THINKING TO GUIDE INSTRUCTION
            All of the teaching practices described in this chapter and throughout the book are
            based on knowledge of children’s mathematical thinking, including both knowledge
            of the research frameworks for how children typically progress and knowledge of
            the thinking of individual children in your classroom. Decisions about what prob-
            lem to pose, what numbers to use, what questions to ask, who to ask, whose idea to
            share, whose idea could be connected to the strategy shared all can be supported by
            your knowledge of the development of children’s mathematical thinking. Each of
            the teaching examples in this chapter involved teachers considering what they knew
            about students’ mathematical thinking in general and what they knew about their own
            students’ thinking in relation to those general ideas. Ms. Scott described why she posed
            the problem about Estebán and his marbles. Her rationale was linked to the two kinds
            of Invented Algorithms she had seen her students use for
            joining problems and wanting to support the use of similar
            strategies in a separating context (shown in the following         CLIP 9.10 Ms. Byron’s
                                                                               lesson
            video). Ms. Byron purposefully stopped to check on Sam-            http://smarturl.it/CM9.10
            uel as she had noticed that he was still working to make
            sense of tens and use them to solve problems even though
            he might not have developed enough understanding to do so. The framework detailed
            in earlier chapters can help you know what to listen for and how to think about where
            to go next. We know from our research that even teachers new to CGI can readily listen
            to their students’ mathematical thinking and, as they make sense of this thinking in
            relation to the framework, they get better and better at using what they hear from their
            students to make instructional decisions.




                                            Developing Classroom Practice: Posing Problems and Eliciting Thinking    151




Carpenter_book.indb 151                                                                                             9/18/14 9:41 AM
                            I   need a framework. I definitely think there’s a framework with CGI
                                that’s made a big difference for me. Strategies have been identified,
                             there’s definitely a hierarchy. That’s helped. . . . I mean, a lot of curriculum
                             materials have problem solving. A lot of them do. But you don’t know
                             what to do with it. I mean, how do you decide why problems would be
                             more difficult than others for children to solve? You know, what makes
                             this problem difficult? And with CGI, that has been researched, and I
                             think accurately researched, and it enables me to know why certain kids
                             are struggling, what I can do to facilitate that. So I think a framework is
                             critical. For a person like me, especially. I want to know where I’m going
                             and where I’m taking them. So I need that framework.
                                                                                  —Sue Berthouex, teacher




     152                  Children’s Mathematics




Carpenter_book.indb 152                                                                                         9/18/14 9:41 AM
