International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education (1997), 8,30-43



     Intelligent Tutoring Goes To School in the Big City


            Kenneth R. Koedinger                                       John R. Anderson
      Human-Computer Interaction Institute                             William H. Hadley
         School of Computer Science                                      Mary A. Mark
         Carnegie Mellon University                                Department of Psychology
            Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                   Carnegie Mellon University
                     USA                                             Pittsburgh, PA 15213
              ken.koedinger@cs.cmu.edu                                       USA
http://sands.psy.cmu.edu/ACT/people/koedinger.html

Abstract. This paper reports on a large-scale experiment introducing and
evaluating intelligent tutoring in an urban High School setting. Critical to
the success of this project has been a client-centered design approach that
has matched our client's expertise in curricular objectives and classroom
teaching with our expertise in artificial intelligence and cognitive
psychology. The Pittsburgh Urban Mathematics Project (PUMP) has
produced an algebra curriculum that is centrally focused on mathematical
analysis of real world situations and the use of computational tools. We
have built an intelligent tutor, called PAT, that supports this curriculum
and has been made a regular part of 9th grade Algebra in 3 Pittsburgh
schools. In the 1993-94 school year, we evaluated the effect of the PUMP
curriculum and PAT tutor use. On average the 470 students in
experimental classes outperformed students in comparison classes by 15%
on standardized tests and 100% on tests targeting the PUMP objectives.
This study provides further evidence that laboratory tutoring systems can
be scaled up and made to work, both technically and pedagogically, in real
and unforgiving settings like urban high schools.

1.      Introduction

    We have created an intelligent tutoring system for algebra problem
solving that we call PAT. PAT stands for PUMP Algebra Tutor or
Practical Algebra Tutor. PAT is practical in two ways. First, PAT is
practical in its pedagogical focus. Students engage in investigations of
real world problem situations and use modern algebraic tools
(spreadsheets, graphers, and symbolic calculators) to express covariance
relationships, to solve problems and to communicate results. Second,
PAT is practical in going beyond a laboratory prototype to a fully
functioning system. It is currently being used by more than 500 high
school students in 3 Pittsburgh city schools.
Intelligent Tutoring Goes to School in the Big City


    This paper reports on a large-scale experiment in the classroom
implementation of PAT. We start with a description of the system design
-- a marriage of content guidance, provided by experts in mathematics
pedagogy, and scientific support, provided by the ACT theory and
cognitive tutoring technology (Anderson, Corbett, Koedinger, & Pelletier,
1995; Anderson & Pelletier, 1991). Next, we present the results of the
first formative evaluation of this system. Students in tutor-using classes
outperformed students in comparison classes by 15% on standardized tests
and 100% on tests that emphasized real world problem solving and
multiple mathematical representations.

2.     A Curriculum and Cognitive Tutor for Practical Algebra

2.1.   Client-Centered Design and the PUMP Curriculum

    The PAT tutor has been developed through a collaboration between
the Pittsburgh Urban Mathematics Project (PUMP) in the Pittsburgh
School System and the cognitive tutoring group at Carnegie Mellon
University. Critical to the success of this project has been a client-
centered design approach that has matched our client's expertise in
curricular objectives and classroom teaching with our expertise in artificial
intelligence and cognitive psychology.
    As part of the Pittsburgh Urban Mathematics Project (PUMP), local
mathematics teachers have produced a more accessible algebra curriculum
that focuses on mathematical analysis of real world situations and use of
computational tools. The PUMP curriculum materials employ "real
world" situations designed to make mathematics more meaningful and
accessible to students. All students come to high school with experience
of the mathematics used in "everyday" life, but many are unable to connect
this to "school" mathematics (Resnick, 1987). The PUMP curriculum
materials try to bridge this gap by using situations from everyday life to
generate the mathematics and as a means for the students to anchor their
knowledge (cf. CTG, 1990). The unifying concept of the PUMP Algebra
curriculum is the use of functional models, represented variously in tables,
graphs, and symbols, to analyze and explore situations. The PUMP
curriculum is consistent with the new curriculum recommendations of the
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM, 1989). NCTM
recommends increased attention to the use of real-world problems, use of
computer utilities, mathematical communication, and making connections.
They also recommend decreased attention to traditional word problems by
type (e.g., coin, work, mixture), the simplification of radicals, factoring
polynomials, and other paper-and-pencil techniques.

                                          31
                                         Koedinger, Anderson, Hadley and Mark


    In the PUMP classroom students work on mini-projects investigating
problem situations like comparing the current quantity and growth rate of
old growth forest in the US to the harvest rate. Students investigate such
situations by (1) addressing questions, like "Assuming these figures do not
change, when will all the old growth forest be gone?", (2) creating a table
to investigate the relationships between quantities, (3) scaling, graphing
and identifying points of intersection, (4) using algebraic notation to
concisely represent the underlying structure of the situation, and (5) using
algebraic notation to compute solutions.
    PAT was built to support this kind of mathematical investigation and
problem solving. Most importantly, PAT was designed to help students
develop algebraic skills which they can use in the context of real-life
problem situations. The PAT learning environment includes a set of
computational tools to aid investigation (a spreadsheet, grapher, and
symbolic calculator) and an organized curriculum of problem situations.
In developing PAT, we worked closely with both curriculum designers
from the school system, and teachers in actual classrooms with actual
students, all of whom have given us valuable information. Direct
observation and protocols from tutoring sessions provide rich sources of
evidence that we have drawn on to increase our understanding of students
and to improve the design of PAT.

2.2.   Principled Design of Cognitive Tutors

    The design of PAT was also guided by theoretical principles. As a
cognitive tutor (Anderson, et. al, 1995), PAT has the defining feature of
containing a psychological model of the cognitive processes behind
successful and near-successful student performance. Based on the ACT
theory, this cognitive model is written as a system of if-then production
rules that are capable of generating the multitude of solution steps and
mis-steps typical of students. The cognitive model is the basis for two
student modeling techniques: model tracing and knowledge tracing.
Model tracing is used to monitor student's progress through a problem
solution (see Anderson, Boyle, Corbett, & Lewis, 1990). This tracing is
done in the background by matching student actions to those the model
might generate. The tutor is mostly silent. However, when help is needed,
the tutor knows where the student is and can provide hints that are
individualized to the student's particular approach to the problem.
Knowledge tracing is used to monitor students' learning from problem to
problem (see Corbett & Anderson, 1992). A Bayesian estimation
procedure identifies students' strengths and weaknesses relative to the
production rules in the cognitive model. This assessment information is

                                    32
Intelligent Tutoring Goes to School in the Big City


used to individualize problem selection and optimally pace students
through the curriculum.
    PAT's cognitive model and general design is the consequence of basic
research on mathematical cognition. Our previous research has shown
that students have informal inductive routes to mathematical knowledge
that often precede formal instruction in the deductive use of symbols
(Koedinger & Anderson, 1990; 1991). Thus, contrary to popular belief,
students can perform better on algebra word problems under certain
circumstances than on the equivalent algebraic equations (Koedinger &
Tabachneck, 1995). We applied such results in early experiments with
PAT where we showed that students learned more from a theory-inspired
"inductive-support" version of the tutor than from a "textbook" version
based on a popular Algebra text (Koedinger & Anderson, 1996).

2.3.   Description of PAT: A Cognitive Tutor for Practical Algebra

    In day to day life, people deal with a wide variety of situations that
cause them to draw on basic algebra and reasoning skills. Checking the
amount of a paycheck, estimating the cost of a rental car for a trip, and
choosing between long-distance telephone service offers from AT&T and
MCI are just three examples of real-world situations in which algebraic
skills are useful. As part of the development of PAT, Pittsburgh teachers
wrote problem situations like these intended to be personally or culturally
relevant to students. Some problem situations are of potential general
interest (e.g., the decline of the condor population), while others are more
specific to Pittsburgh 9th graders (e.g., making money shoveling snow).
These problems were added to PAT using a problem authoring
environment in which teachers type the problem description, enter an
example solution, and edit the guesses the system makes about how
quantities in the solution to relate to phrases in the text.
    Students work through PAT problem situations by reading a textual
description of the situation and a number of questions about it. They
investigate the situation by representing it in tables, graphs, and symbols
and using these representations to answer the questions. Helping students
to understand and use multiple representations of information is a major
focus of the tutor.




                                          33
                                         Koedinger, Anderson, Hadley and Mark




  Figure 1. A screen from PAT, a cognitive tutor for practical algebra.

    In Figure 1, the PAT screen shows a student's partial solution for a
problem. This problem appears in later stages of the curriculum after
students have acquired some expertise with constructing and using graphs
and tables for single linear equations. The top-left corner of the tutor
screen provides a description of the problem situation. The problem
involves two rental companies, Hertz and Avis, that charge different rates
for renting large trucks. Students investigate the problem situation using
multiple representations and computer-based tools, including a
spreadsheet, grapher, and symbolic calculator -- in Figure 1 these are the
Worksheet, Grapher and Equation Solver windows, respectively. Students
construct the Worksheet (lower-left of Figure 1) by identifying the relevant
quantities in the situation, labeling the columns, entering the appropriate
units, entering algebraic expressions, and by answering the numbered
questions in the problem description. Students construct the graph of the
problem situation (upper-right) by labeling axes, setting appropriate
bounds and scale, graphing the lines, and identifying the point of
intersection. The Equation Solver (lower-center) can be used at any time
to help fill in the spreadsheet and identify points of intersection. The
student can use these representations to reason about real-world concerns,
such as deciding when it becomes better to rent from one company rather
than another.

                                    34
Intelligent Tutoring Goes to School in the Big City


    Most students spend 20-30 minutes solving a problem of this type on
the computer. During that time, the tutor monitors their activities, and
provides feedback on what they are doing. The provision of timely
feedback is one way in which the tutor individualizes instruction. For the
most part, the tutor is silently tracing students actions in the background.
When a student makes an error, it is "flagged". For text items, flagging is
achieved by putting the student's entry in outline text. Errors in plotting
points in the grapher tool are flagged by coloring the point gray rather than
black and indicating the coordinates of the incorrectly placed point so that
the student can see how they differ from the intended coordinates in a
Worksheet row. Often flagging is done without comment, which appears
to reduce students' negative feelings associated with making errors in math
class. But if the student's error is a commonly occurring slip or
misconception that has been codified in a buggy production rule, a
message is provided that indicates what is wrong with the answer or
suggests a better alternative. Examples of buggy productions in PAT
include putting a correct value for a cell in the Worksheet in an adjacent
row or column, confusing the dependent and independent variable in
formula writing, incorrectly entering arithmetic signs in equation solving,
and confusing the x and y coordinates in graphing.
    This provision of timely feedback is a critical feature of cognitive
tutors that leads to substantial cognitive and motivational benefits. In a
parametric study with the LISP tutor, Corbett and Anderson (1991)
provided a demonstration of how the immediacy of feedback leads to
dramatic reductions in the learning time needed to reach the same level of
post-training performance -- learning time was 3 times longer in the most
delayed feedback condition than in the most immediate. In addition to
cognitive benefits, there are also motivational benefits of timely feedback.
Much like the motivational attraction of video games, students know right
away that they are making progress and having success at a challenging
task. Further, because the system does not make a big deal out of errors,
students do not feel the social stigma associated with making an error in
class or on homework. Errors are a private event that are usually quickly
resolved and the student is then back to making progress.
    In addition to error feedback, a second way PAT individualizes
instruction is by giving help on request. At any step in constructing a
solution, a student can ask for help. The tutor chooses help messages for
presentation by using the production system to identify a desirable next
activity. Choice of a desirable action is based on the student's current
focus of activity, the overall status of the student's solution, and internal
knowledge of interdependencies between problem-solving activities as
represented in the production rules. Multiple levels of help are provided

                                          35
                                         Koedinger, Anderson, Hadley and Mark


so that more detailed information can be obtained by making repeated help
requests.
    The "Message" window in Figure 1 shows the result of a student help
request. The current focus of attention is based on the selection of the
worksheet cell for question 4, under the column entry for 'miles driven' --
this cell is highlighted in Figure 1. Given the information in the problem
about the costs of renting from Avis or Hertz, the student is asked: "If we
have budgeted a total of $1000 to rent this truck, how many miles can we
drive it if we rent it from Hertz?"
    An initial hint directs the student to consider information in the
question that is relevant to finding a value for the distance: "You know
that the cost of renting from Avis depends on the distance driven, and you
are given a value for the cost of renting from Avis." By asking for help a
second time, the student receives a more detailed description suggesting
that the distance can be calculated by relating information given in the
question to a particular algebraic relationship described in the problem.
"You can calculate the distance driven by manipulating the expression the
cost of renting from Avis equals 0.13 times the distance driven plus
585.0." Further messages are also available, describing in more detail the
type of equation that the student needs to set up and solve. The Equation
Solver window (lower-center) shows how the student solved a similar
question (question 3). The student enters their own equation and solves it
by indicating standard algebraic manipulations.
    By keeping students engaged in successful problem solving, PAT's
feedback and hint messages reduce student frustration and provide for a
valuable sense of accomplishment. In addition to these functions of model
tracing, PAT provides learning support through knowledge tracing.
Results of knowledge tracing are shown to student and teacher in the
Skillometer window. By monitoring a student's acquisition of problem
solving skills through knowledge tracing, the tutor can identify individual
areas of difficulty (Corbett, Anderson, Carver, and Brancolini, 1994) and
present problems targeting specific skills which the student has not yet
mastered. For example, a student who was skilled in writing equations
with positive slopes and intercepts, but had difficulty with negative slope
equations would be assigned problems involving negative slopes.
    Knowledge tracing can also be used for "self-pacing", that is, the
promotion of students through lessons of the curriculum based on their
mastery of the skills in that lesson. In the 1993-94 study, knowledge-
tracing capabilities of the tutor were not fully used. Knowledge tracing
controlled the selection of problems within lessons, but not the self-paced
advancement of students between lessons.


                                    36
Intelligent Tutoring Goes to School in the Big City


    Self-pacing was not used for two reasons. First, participating teachers
were not certain how to coordinate students' differing rates of progress
through PAT lessons with the material being addressed in the regular
classroom. Teachers were already tackling a number of new challenges in
using PAT and in simply using computers in classroom. Second, the
researchers needed more student data to decompose domain competence
into production rules that best match the grain size of algebra learning
events.
    Instead of self-pacing progress between lessons, students spent a fixed
amount of time on each lesson, about 3-4 class periods. At the end of
each such installment, all students were advanced to the next lesson
whether or not knowledge tracing how judged them to have mastered the
skills in that lesson. The current 1994-95 study fully utilizes knowledge-
tracing capabilities of the tutor, within and between lessons.
    The PAT curriculum for the 1993-94 school year contained six lessons
of problems. Initially, students explored common situations involving
positive quantities and graphing in the first quadrant of the Cartesian
coordinate system (positive values only on the x and y axis's). As the year
progressed more complex situations were analyzed that required negative
quantities and graphing in the other quadrants. Similarly, as the situations
increased in complexity, formal equation solving and graphing techniques
were introduced to enable students to find solutions. Systems of linear
situations and quadratics are developed through the introduction of
situations in which they naturally occur. For example, two rival
companies that make custom T-shirts with different price structures
provided an opportunity to explore a system of two linear equations.
Modeling vertical motion provided a context for introducing and using
quadratic functions. Problems involving quadratic functions are part of the
PUMP curriculum, but were not yet implemented in PAT.

2.4.   Special Features of the PUMP Classroom

    In the classroom students work together in groups or teams to solve
problems similar to those presented by the tutor. Teams construct their
solutions by making tables, expressions, equations, and graphs which they
then use to answer questions and make interpretations and predictions.
The transfer of the computer tools to paper and pencil techniques and the
interpretation and understanding of these tools are the emphasis of the
classroom. Literacy is stressed by requiring students to answer all
questions in complete sentences, to write reports and to give presentations
of their findings to their peers.



                                          37
                                         Koedinger, Anderson, Hadley and Mark


    The project also uses alternate forms of assessment including
performance tasks, long term projects, student portfolios, and journal
writing. From the first day all answers must be written in complete
sentences to be accepted. At the end of each quarter students are given a
performance task as a final examination. At the end of each semester
these tasks are graded by the teachers at a mini-scoring conference where
all the teachers in the project come together, construct a scoring rubric,
and score all the student papers in an afternoon. Because each teacher
scores papers from every other teachers' class as well as their own they
come to have a better understanding of the objectives of this new
curriculum.

3.     A Large-Scale Classroom Experiment

     The on-going evaluation of PAT and the PUMP curriculum is a kind of
"design experiment" (Brown, 1992) on the effect of both instructional
innovations in the unforgiving setting of real schools. Evolving versions of
PAT have been tested in laboratory experiments following the cognitive
tutoring design methodology (Koedinger & Anderson, 1996; Anderson, et
al., 1995). However, the urban classroom situation is unlike the refined
and controlled environment of the lab and laboratory standards cannot
realistically be applied. As such, we have begun by addressing the
practical question of whether the whole package, PUMP curriculum and
PAT, is effective by comparing it against a traditional curriculum without
PAT. By laboratory standards, this experiment is confounds two
variables, a change in curriculum and the use of PAT. However, our
strategy is first to establish the success of the whole package and then, if
indeed it is successful, to examine the effect of the curriculum and
intelligent tutoring components independently.

3.1.   Method

    Data reported is from the 1993-94 school year. The student population
came from 3 Pittsburgh Public High Schools, Langley, Brashear and
Carrick, with similar demographics and student aptitudes. These schools
are about 50% African-American, 50% single-parent families, and only
15% go on to college. Students in the experimental classes received two
treatments: they were taught the new PUMP curriculum and they worked
with PAT for approximately 25 out of 180 of their normal class periods.
Students worked on 6 lessons with the complete PAT environment and 1
lesson with the equation solving tutor module alone. The "PUMP+PAT"
group consisted of 20 algebra classes that involved 470 students and 10

                                    38
Intelligent Tutoring Goes to School in the Big City


teachers. The 12 classes from Langley high school contained students
who in prior years would have been placed into a non-academic general
math class, rather than algebra. Because of satisfaction with the pilot use
of the curriculum and tutor in the prior year, Langley decided to assign all
9th graders to algebra instead.
    The comparison classes received a traditional curriculum and did not
use PAT. There were two types of comparison classes. The matched
"Comparison" group consisted of 5 algebra classes that involved 120
students and 3 teachers. These students were from roughly the same
background as the experimental classes. If anything, Comparison students
were somewhat better prepared as a group given the inclusion of students
in the Langley experimental classes who would otherwise have been
placed in a lower level math. The "Scholars-Comparison" group consisted
of 2 "scholars" algebra classes involving 35 students and 1 teacher.
Scholars courses are an academic track for students who are selected
based on prior school success. None of the experimental classes were
scholars algebra classes.
    We looked at students' math grades in the previous school year to
verify that there were no differences in students prior mathematical
background that would put the PUMP+PAT group at an advantage. Using
1 for a D and a 4 for an A, the grade averages were lowest at 2.1 for
PUMP+PAT, next at 2.4 for the Comparison group, and highest at 2.6 for
the Scholars-Comparison group.

3.2.   Assessment Design

    Designing a fair assessment plan for an experiment involving
curriculum reform is difficult. Standardized tests are often rejected for this
purpose because they do not address the objectives of the new curriculum.
However, we reasoned that if PUMP+PAT students did better on reform
objectives yet were worse on the basic skills tapped by standardized
assessments, we would have just shifted the focus of instruction. Such
assessments would in effect reflect creation of a new course: not
necessarily a bad goal, but not evidence of an improvement in the
instructional process. We wanted to show experimental classes doing
much better on the reform objectives of authentic problem solving and
representational tool use, and at least as well or better on the basic skills
tapped by standardized tests. Thus, we gave both types of tests.
    We used two types of standardized tests: an Iowa Algebra Aptitude
test and a subset of the Math SAT appropriate for 9th graders. We also
designed two tests to assess reform objectives reflecting NCTM's
recommendations and the PUMP curriculum. The Problem Situation Test

                                          39
                                                    Koedinger, Anderson, Hadley and Mark


was created to assess students' abilities to investigate problem situations,
presented verbally, that have algebraic content. The Representations Test
was created to assess students' abilities to translate between
representations of algebraic content including verbal descriptions, graphs,
and symbolic equations.
    The assessments were given over two days at the end of the spring
semester during a normal 44 minute class period. All students took the
Iowa on the first day of testing. On the second day, approximately half of
the students took each of the other tests.

3.3.   Results and Discussion

    Table 1 shows the percentage correct, standard deviation (in
parentheses), and N (second line) for the groups on the four tests. Note
that because of the high absenteeism that is typical of city schools
particularly near the end of the school year, there were a substantial
number of students who missed one or both days of the assessment. For
each test, a between-subjects ANOVA was run with three levels,
Comparison, PUMP+PAT, and Scholars-Comparison. The addition of the
Scholars-Control group provides a upper edge comparison for the
intervention. The results of these tests are shown in the 5th column of
Table 1.
    The 6th and final column shows effect sizes in terms of standard
deviation units (sigma) of the PUMP+PAT group above the Comparison
group. Effect sizes provide a metric for assessing the impact of
instructional interventions. The Bloom (1984) result that individual human
tutors can bring students 2 sigma above normal classroom instruction sets
a standard of comparison for the impact of intelligent tutors. Previous
studies have shown cognitive tutors to yield as much as a 1 sigma effect
over control conditions (Anderson, Corbett, Koedinger, and Pelletier,
1995; Koedinger & Anderson, 1993).

               Table 1. Results of Final Testing of PUMP+PAT,
                Comparison, and Scholars-Comparison Classes
                     Comparison   PUMP+            Scholars-    F value            sigma
                                  PAT              Comparison   and significance
 Iowa                .46 (.17)    .52 (.19)        .68 (.17)    F(2,398) = 17.0    0.3
 Algebra Aptitude    80           287              34           p < .0001
 Math SAT Subset     .27 (.14)    .32 (.16)        .42 (.15)    F(2, 205) = 5.1    0.3
                     44           149              15           p < .01
 Problem Situation   .22 (.22)    .39 (.33)        .38 (.26)    F(2, 186) = 5.3    0.7
 Test                42           127              20           p < .01
 Representations     .15 (.18)    .37 (.32)        .12 (.16)    F(2, 183) = 13.4   1.2
 Test                44           124              18           p < .0001



                                              40
Intelligent Tutoring Goes to School in the Big City



    On the Iowa Algebra Aptitude test, PUMP+PAT scores are
significantly higher than the Comparison (p < .05), a 0.3 sigma effect.
They are significantly lower than the Scholars-Comparison (p < .01). On
the SAT subset, the PUMP+PAT scores are higher than the Comparison
scores (0.3 sigma), but there is a lot of variance in this smaller sample and
PUMP+PAT is not significantly higher than Comparison (p > .05) nor
significantly lower than Scholars-Comparison (p > .05). The largest
effects come on the new NCTM-oriented tests. On the Problem Situation
test, PUMP+PAT scores are significantly and substantially higher than
Comparison (p < .01), a 0.7 sigma effect. They match up with the
Scholars-Comparison (p > .05). On the Representations test, PUMP+PAT
scores are significantly and substantially higher than Comparison (p <
.01), a 1.2 sigma effect, and than the Scholars-Comparison (p < .01).
    To summarize, the PUMP+PAT classes scored about 1 sigma better on
the NCTM-oriented tests that were the target of the curriculum. Their
scores were about 100% better or double those of the Comparison classes.
These learning gains appear to occur at no expense to basic skills
objectives of standardized tests. In fact, PUMP+PAT classes scored
about 15% better on these tests.

4.     Conclusion

    Cooperation between the Pittsburgh Urban Mathematics Project and
the cognitive tutoring group at Carnegie Mellon has led to the
development of the PAT tutor, and its integration into classrooms in three
Pittsburgh Public Schools. As expected from past experience (Schofield,
Evans-Rhodes, & Huber, 1990; Wertheimer, 1990), the tutor has been
enthusiastically received by students and teachers. Teachers comment that
working in the computer lab with PAT engages students who present
difficulties in the normal classroom. In addition, teachers like the way that
the tutor accommodates a large proportion of student questions and frees
teachers to give more individualized help to students with particular needs.
As one concrete example of teacher support, a teacher's enthusiastic
testimonial of the program was critical in convincing the Pittsburgh school
board to purchase computer labs to expand the program to two more high
schools for the 1994-95 school year.
    Evaluation of PAT and the PUMP curriculum is continuing. In the
1994-95 school year, the PAT curriculum expanded to include 10 lessons
and 214 problem situations. Students are in the computer lab two days a
week, working with PAT at a self-paced rate. Student time on the tutor



                                          41
                                         Koedinger, Anderson, Hadley and Mark


will more than double (roughly from 25 to 70 days) compared to the 93-94
school year.

Acknowledgments

   This research was supported by contract MDR-92-53161 from the
National Science Foundation.
   Thanks to the teachers of the experimental and comparison classes.
Thanks also to other key members of our Pittsburgh Advanced Cognitive
Tutor center: Al Corbett, Ray Pelletier, Steve Ritter, Jackie Snyder.

References

Anderson, J. R., Boyle, C. F., Corbett, A. T., & Lewis, M.W. (1990).
   Cognitive modeling and intelligent tutoring. Artificial Intelligence, 42,
   7-49.
Anderson, J. R., Corbett, A. T., Koedinger, K. R., & Pelletier, R. (1995).
   Cognitive tutors: Lessons learned. The Journal of the Learning
   Sciences, 4 (2) 167-207.
Anderson, J. R., & Pelletier, R. (1991). A development system for model–
   tracing tutors. In Proceedings of the International Conference of the
   Learning Sciences (pp. 1–8). Evanston, IL.
Bloom, B. S. (1984). The 2 sigma problem: The search for methods of
   group instruction as effective as one-to-one tutoring. Educational
   Researcher, 13, 3-16.
Brown, A. L.          (1992).     Design experiments: Theoretical and
   methodological challenges in creating complex interventions. The
   Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2, 137-178.
Corbett, A.T. & Anderson, J.R. (1991). Feedback control and learning to
   program with the CMU LISP tutor. Paper presented at the annual
   meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago,
   IL.
Corbett, A.T. & Anderson, J.R. (1992). Student modeling and mastery
   learning in a computer-based programming tutor. In Proceedings of
   the Second International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems.
   Montreal, Canada.
Corbett, A.T., Anderson, J.R., Carver, V.H. and Brancolini, S.A. (1994).
   Individual differences and predictive validity in student modeling. In
   A. Ram & K. Eiselt (eds.) The Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual
   Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
   Erlbaum.



                                    42
Intelligent Tutoring Goes to School in the Big City


Cognition and Technology Group at Vanderbilt (1990). Anchored
   instruction and its relationship to situated cognition. Educational
   Researcher, 19 (6), 2-10.
Koedinger, K. R., & Anderson, J. R. (1990). Abstract planning and
   perceptual chunks: Elements of expertise in geometry. Cognitive
   Science, 14, 511-550.
Koedinger, K. R., & Anderson, J. R. (1991). Interaction of deductive and
   inductive reasoning strategies in geometry novices. In Proceedings of
   the Thirteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
   Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Koedinger, K. R. & Anderson, J. R. (1993). Effective use of intelligent
   software in high school math classrooms. In Proceedings of the World
   Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education, (pp. 241-248).
   Charlottesville, VA: Association for the Advancement of Computing in
   Education.
Koedinger, K. R., & Anderson, J. R. (1996). Illustrating principled
   design: The early evolution of a cognitive tutor for algebra
   symbolization. Submitted to Interactive Learning Environments.
Koedinger, K.R., & Tabachneck, H.J.M. (1995). Verbal reasoning as a
   critical component in early algebra. Paper presented at the annual
   meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San
   Francisco, CA.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (1989). Curriculum and
   Evaluation Standards for School Mathematics. Reston, VA: The
   Council.
Resnick, L. B. (1987). Learning in school and out. Educational
   Researcher, 16(9), 13-20.
Schofield, J. W., Evans-Rhodes, D., & Huber, B. R. (1990). Artificial
   intelligence in the classroom: The impact of a computer-based tutor on
   teachers and students. Social Science Computer Review, 8:1, 24-41.
Wertheimer, R. (1990). The geometry proof tutor: An “intelligent” computer-based
  tutor in the classroom. Mathematics Teacher, April, 308-317




                                          43
