See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/348444388



A practical perspective on knowledge space theory: ALEKS and its data

Preprint · January 2021
DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.20082.53448




CITATIONS                                                                                                 READS
0                                                                                                         67


4 authors, including:

            Hasan Burak Uzun                                                                                         Christopher Doble
            ALEKS Corporation                                                                                        ALEKS Corporation
            11 PUBLICATIONS 56 CITATIONS                                                                             20 PUBLICATIONS 121 CITATIONS

                SEE PROFILE                                                                                               SEE PROFILE




Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:


              From Learning Spaces to (Medical) Diagnosis Spaces View project




 All content following this page was uploaded by Hasan Burak Uzun on 14 January 2021.

 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
  A practical perspective on knowledge space theory: ALEKS and its data

                        Eric Cosyn, Hasan Uzun, Christopher Doble, Jeffrey Matayoshi
                              McGraw Hill/ALEKS Corporation, Irvine, CA, United States




Abstract

The ALEKS (Assessment and LEarning in Knowledge Spaces) educational software system is an instantiation
of knowledge space theory (KST) that has been used by millions of students in mathematics, chemistry,
statistics and accounting. The software employs a probabilistic assessment based on KST for placement into
an appropriate course or curriculum, a learning mode in which students are guided through course material
according to a knowledge structure, and regularly spaced re-assessments which are also based on KST. In
each of these aspects, the interactions of the student with the system are guided by the theory and by insights
learned from student data. We present several relationships between theory and data for the ALEKS system.
We begin by surveying the ALEKS system and examining some practical aspects of implementing KST on
a large scale. We then study the effectiveness of the ALEKS assessment using both standard statistical
measures and ones adapted to the KST context. Finally, we examine the learning process in ALEKS via
statistics for the learning mode and its associated knowledge structures.
Keywords: knowledge space theory, adaptive assessment, intelligent tutoring system, layers of a knowledge
state


1. Introduction

   Knowledge space theory (KST) is an approach to the assessment of knowledge that is based on a combi-
natoric and probabilistic model introduced by Doignon and Falmagne (1985). KST has inspired a large liter-
ature which includes hundreds of peer-reviewed journal articles and several books; a bibliographic database is
maintained by Hockemeyer (2020) at the University of Graz in Austria. ALEKS, which stands for Assessment
and LEarning in Knowledge Spaces, is a web-based intelligent tutoring system based on KST that is de-
signed to assess and instruct students in mathematics, chemistry, statistics and accounting. ALEKS has
been available commercially since the late 1990s, and currently, about four to five million students use it
each year. During the two-decade existence of ALEKS, a great deal of data from student interactions with
the system have been collected. These data offer insights into this large-scale implementation of KST; the
goal of this paper is to examine the principal aspects of ALEKS in light of these data.
   A number of studies have been done that scrutinize the relationship between the use of ALEKS and
measures external to ALEKS, such as success in a course or performance on a standardized test. Among


Preprint submitted to Journal of Mathematical Psychology                                       October 28, 2020
these studies, one finds Hagerty et al. (2010); Mojarad et al. (2018) for college mathematics, Baxter and
Thibodeau (2011) for accounting, Hickey et al. (2020) for college chemistry, Hu et al. (2007) for college
statistics, Huang et al. (2016); Craig et al. (2013, 2011) for middle school mathematics, and Reddy and
Harper (2013) for college course placement; see also Fang et al. (2019) for a meta-analysis. The present
paper differs from these studies in that it focuses on measures internal to the ALEKS system, such as the
system’s success in predicting a student’s performance on a particular ALEKS question or her readiness to
learn new ALEKS content. Such a focus is meant to provide a pointed analysis of the workings of KST as
implemented in ALEKS.
   The paper is organized as follows. In the remainder of this section, we give background on both KST
and ALEKS, including the relationship between KST and assessment and learning in ALEKS. In Section 2,
we first examine the effectiveness of the ALEKS assessment using standard statistical measures. Later in
the section, we again examine the ALEKS assessment, but this time using measures more firmly rooted in
KST, namely, measures derived from the ‘layers’ of a knowledge state. In Section 3 we focus on the learning
aspect of the ALEKS system, first surveying how efficiently students learn new material, and then analyzing
the retention and forgetting of learned material, again featuring the notion of knowledge state layers in the
latter case. Section 4 has a short recapitulation.


1.1. Background on knowledge space theory

   At the core of KST is the concept of an item; for the context of ALEKS described in this paper, an item
is a discrete concept or granular topic appearing as part of an academic course. For example, an item for
an introductory high school algebra course might be “Solving a compound linear inequality”, and another
might be “Solving a word problem with two unknowns using a linear equation”. An item is actually a
collection of examples, called instances, each focused on the same, narrow topic, and designed to be equal in
difficulty. One instance of the item “Solving a compound linear inequality” might be “Solve the compound
inequality 4x + 5 ≤ 21 and 2x + 5 > 3,” while another instance might be “Solve the compound inequality
4x−5 > −5 or 3x+2 ≤ −13.” Each time the student is presented a given item, whether in an instructional
setting or in an assessment, a different instance is chosen.
   There are several hundred items that make up a typical academic course, and having the knowledge and
skill to successfully complete all of the items means (according to KST) mastery of the course. A knowledge
state, or simply state, is a particular set of items that some student could be capable of completing correctly.
Denoting the set of all items by Q, a pair (Q, K) is a knowledge structure if K is a family of subsets of Q
containing all the knowledge states that are feasible, that is, that could characterize some student in the
population. In other words, a student whose knowledge state is K can, in principle, correctly complete all
the items in K and would fail to correctly complete any item not in K. (We say “in principle” because, for
example, there is the possibility of careless errors, also called slips.) The family K always includes the empty


                                                       2
set (characterizing a student in the state of complete ignorance) and the set Q (characterizing a student
mastering all of the items).
   Typically in KST, including in ALEKS, the number of states in the knowledge structure is much less
than the number of subsets of Q. This is due in part to the inherent relatedness of items, as some items
are prerequisites of other items. For example, it would be very unlikely, or even impossible, for a student to
have mastered “Solving a compound linear inequality” without having mastered “Solving a one-step linear
equation.” For one particular ALEKS course (College Placement, described in this section below) comprised
of 314 items, the number |K| of states in the knowledge structure is about 1023 , which is considerably
smaller than 2314 ≈ 1094 , the number of subsets of a set with 314 elements. The construction of the
knowledge structure will not be described here; see instead, e.g., Desmarais et al. (1995); Desmarais and Pu
(2005); Koppen and Doignon (1990) and Chapters 15 and 16 in Falmagne and Doignon (2011).
   Additional KST concepts that are important for the ALEKS system are the ‘outer fringe’ and the ‘inner
fringe’ of a knowledge state. The outer fringe of a state K is the set of items q not in K such that K ∪ {q}
is also a knowledge state. The outer fringe of a student’s state may be thought of as the set of items the
student is ‘ready to learn.’ The inner fringe of a state K is the set of items q in K such that K \ {q} is
also a knowledge state. That is, the inner fringe is made up of the items representing the ‘high points’ of
the student’s competence. If the knowledge structure is a learning space (see Definition A.1 in Appendix),
as is the case in ALEKS, the knowledge state of a student is completely determined by the inner fringe and
the outer fringe of the state (Theorem A.2). The fringes are put to use in the functioning of ALEKS, as
described below.
   The next section gives a brief overview of the ALEKS system. It is followed by a discussion of the
implementation of KST in the ALEKS learning and assessment features. As in any other software platform,
there are ongoing improvements made in ALEKS. Our aim is not to cover all the specifics of the current
iteration of ALEKS, but rather to highlight certain processes and to describe the handling of some practical
challenges that arise in such a large-scale implementation of KST.


1.2. A quick overview of the ALEKS system

   A student begins her experience with ALEKS by enrolling in an ALEKS course. There are ALEKS
mathematics courses ranging from third grade mathematics to college precalculus, and there are introductory
college chemistry, statistics, and accounting courses. The full list of ALEKS courses and their sets of items
are available at McGraw Hill (2020). When an instructor sets up an ALEKS course to be taken by a class of
students, she has the option of selecting which items, among all the items available in the domain associated
with the course, will make up the actual course content. Typically, an actual course consists of about 300
to 600 items.



                                                      3
   Once enrolled, the student takes an initial assessment in ALEKS. The assessment aims to determine the
student’s knowledge state at the onset of the course. From the state resulting from the initial assessment,
the student’s outer fringe is determined and serves as the student’s entry point in the ALEKS learning mode.
The student chooses an item from her outer fringe and practices instances of the item. She is given feedback
and access to explanations for those instances. If she performs well enough on those instances, ALEKS
temporarily considers the item to be learned. The item is added to the student’s state, the outer fringe is
re-computed, and the student chooses another outer fringe item to practice.
   Once the student has practiced a certain number of items, or once she has worked in the learning mode
for a certain amount of time since her previous assessment, ALEKS gives her a progress assessment to
confirm her learning. Based on this assessment, ALEKS updates the student’s state. The student is again
placed in the learning mode, and the process repeats—there is a cycle of learning and assessment until
the student has worked through the course, at which time she may take a final assessment. The cycle of
learning and assessment associated with the progress assessment acts as a form of retrieval practice (also
known as testing effect or test-enhanced learning (Roediger III and Butler, 2011)). Numerous studies have
shown that being forced to actively recall information helps to solidify that information in long-term memory
(Bae et al., 2019; Rawson and Dunlosky, 2011; Roediger III and Butler, 2011; Roediger III and Karpicke,
2006a,b). Another benefit of the progress assessment is that, as it moves from one item to another outside
the student’s control, it enforces interleaved practice on items that were previously learned mostly through
massed practice (see Dunlosky et al. (2013) for the benefit of interleaved practice over massed practice).
These benefits make the interplay between assessment and learning a core feature of the ALEKS system.
   Four ALEKS courses are highlighted in this paper. They have been selected as representative of the
mathematics curriculum covered by ALEKS and for the abundance of data they provide. One of the courses
is Sixth-Grade Math, which is either the last mathematics course taken in elementary school or the first
mathematics course taken in middle school; as such, it is taken by students roughly ages 11-12. Another
course is Algebra I, which is usually taught in ninth grade, and so is taken by students ages 14-15. A third
course is College Algebra, which is a higher education course that is often a graduation requirement for
students not in science or engineering majors, unless their high school credentials exempt them from it. We
will call these three courses—Sixth-Grade Math, Algebra I, and College Algebra—learning courses because
students taking them are not expected to have much knowledge of the course material upon starting the
course, and the focus is on helping students learn new material. This is in contrast to the last course we
highlight, College Placement, which is a placement test for incoming college students. It recommends the
highest mathematics course that the student is likely to be successful in, from Basic Math (an arithmetic
course) to first-year Calculus. If a student is not satisfied with her placement recommendation, she has the
option to retake the test, but not before filling her gaps by practicing on a specific course also recommended



                                                      4
by the test. Another particularity of College Placement is that its item content is not customizable by the
instructor.
   Table 1 reports a few usage statistics for the four courses. The data are for students who took their initial
assessment over the period from August 15 to September 30, 2018, for the three learning courses, and over
the period from March to September, that same year, for College Placement. The data report the students’
activity over the length of the course, which is a full academic year for Sixth-Grade Math and Algebra I, and
a semester or an academic quarter for College Algebra. For College Placement, a retake of the test, when it
occurs, happens typically within one or two weeks of the original test.

Table 1: Usage statistics for four ALEKS courses. The numbers are averages per student, with standard deviations

in parentheses. These statistics cover several months in 2018-19 (as described in the text).


                                      Number of items            Number              Number         Total time
        Course               N
                                       in actual course       of assessments     of items learned    in hours

  Sixth-Grade Math         99,482        385.3 (68.1)            4.9 (3.6)         128.2 (110.8)    15.6 (14.8)
              Algebra I    63,097        523.1 (172.0)           4.1 (3.6)         104.3 (112.9)    13.7 (16.9)
     College Algebra       19,131        301.5 (123.7)           5.0 (4.0)         145.2 (113.6)    31.4 (27.1)
  College Placement       548,391        314.0    (0.0)          1.3 (0.7)                -          2.1 (1.7)



1.3. Knowledge space theory as implemented in ALEKS
   The above is only a brief overview of the ALEKS experience, with many details left out. What follows are
discussions of some specifics of the ALEKS assesssment and learning mode, with a few practical challenges
highlighted and their solutions outlined.
   At the heart of any ALEKS course is the knowledge structure. As mentioned earlier, we will not cover
here the construction of the knowledge structure, but we simply note that everywhere in the following, when
we mention the knowledge structure (and by extension its knowledge states and operations on them), we
actually mean the projection (Definition A.3 and Theorem A.4) of the knowledge structure on the subset of
items chosen by the instructor for the course.
   An ALEKS assessment can be viewed as a probabilistic search among all of the feasible states to uncover
the student’s latent state. Such an algorithm starts with some initial probability distribution on the states
(Definition A.6). Then an item that roughly splits the distribution into two equal parts is selected. This
item is such that the probabilities of the states that contain it add to about 0.5, and we say that the item has
a likelihood close to 0.5. After each response from the student, the probabilities of the states are updated
based on the response. For a correct response, the update results in an increase of probability for the
states containing the item and a decrease for the other states. For an incorrect response, the update goes


                                                          5
in the other direction, with the probabilities of the states not containing the item being increased and the
remainder decreased. For each subsequent question, the algorithm selects an item that has a likelihood close
to 0.5, and the probabilities are updated based on the student’s response. The assessment proceeds until a
single knowledge state emerges with a very high probability1 . Section 13.4 of Falmagne and Doignon (2011)
provides a formal description of the principles outlined here.
    Such an algorithm assumes that all the states in the knowledge structure can be listed and assigned a
probability to begin the assessment. It also assumes that the probabilities of the states can be updated in a
timely fashion, with the likelihoods of items computed from the states and then used in selecting the most
informative question after each response. However, the sizes of the knowledge structures in ALEKS create
several challenges to these assumptions. For most ALEKS knowledge structures, there are too many states
to list even with modern computing power, and updating the probabilities of the states between questions
is not feasible. To overcome this, the ALEKS system currently employs an assessment algorithm similar to
the one outlined in Section 8.8 of Falmagne et al. (2013). In this algorithm, the set of items in the course
is partitioned into several subsets, and the assessment is run in parallel, simultaneously on these subsets.
Each subset gets its knowledge structure via projection from the full knowledge structure, and each of these
knowledge substructures has a size that allows for the listing of its states, and for the probabilities of the
states to be computed. Following the student’s answer to the selected item, the probabilities of the states
for the subset to which the item belongs are updated as described above. A key feature of the algorithm is
its ability to carry the information gained from the student’s answer to the other subsets (to which the item
does not belong) and to update the probabilities for the states in these subsets.
    One optimization used by the assessment is to perform its search on a subset of the knowledge structure
that is relevant to that particular assessment. For example, initial assessments are taken by students who
may have mastered the prerequisite material for the course (some of which is typically part of the domain of
knowledge for that course) but not necessarily much more. The initial assessment thus performs the search
on a smaller but very representative set of knowledge states that reflects this information. On the other
hand, the focus of progress assessments is quite different. They are not designed for placement from scratch
but mostly for testing the recent learning progress of the student. Consequently the progress assessment
runs a local search, essentially in the neighborhood (Definition A.5) of the knowledge states recently crossed
by the student. For both types of assessments, the probability distribution on the knowledge states at the
onset of the assessment is not uniform but is instead informed by past assessment data from the course.

  1 Note that, because of the probabilistic nature of the assessment procedure, this final state may contain an item to which

the student gave an incorrect response. Such a response is regarded as due to a careless error. ALEKS items typically have
open-ended answers, in the sense that the system avoids multiple choice formats and instead uses answer input tools that mimic
what would be done with paper and pencil. As such, the lucky guess probability may be assumed to be very small.




                                                              6
    Even the most efficient assessment algorithm needs to ask more questions than practical to converge
to a single state, especially in the case of the initial assessment. For the College Placement course, the
knowledge structure contains about 1023 ≈ 277 states. If all states were equally likely at the beginning of
the assessment, an algorithm that could eliminate half of the remaining states after each question would still
require 77 questions in the worst case to converge to a single state. It is not practical to ask a student this
many questions in an assessment. Based on the feedback from students and instructors over the years, the
number of questions in an initial assessment has been capped at 30. This number strikes a balance between
the need to gather enough information about the student’s knowledge state and the risk of overwhelming
the student with too many questions.2 All assessments also ask a randomly selected ‘extra problem’ used
for testing purposes (see Section 2.1 below). So there are actually up to 29 questions in an initial assessment
that are selected adaptively and used for uncovering the student’s state.
    In the ideal case, an assessment concludes once all the items can be categorized as either likely to have
been mastered by the student (‘in-state’) or likely not to have been mastered by the student (‘out-of-state’).
Typically, an item falls in the former category if its likelihood is above 80% and the latter category if its
likelihood is less than 20%. Most often, however, the assessment ends because it reached the maximum
number of questions. While most items will then have a likelihood very close to either 1 or 0, the items
not yet categorized as in-state or out-of-state will be categorized as ‘uncertain’. The state assigned to the
student at the end of the assessment does not include these uncertain items and so may underestimate the
student’s latent state. After the initial assessment, the learning of such uncertain items is fast-tracked (see
below) and allows the new student to begin the learning process with easier material. As learning progresses,
the initial underestimation quickly disappears.
    Another distinction relevant to our discussion concerns the updating rule of the assessment. After an
incorrect response, the probabilities of the states that do not contain the item are increased, while the
probabilities of the remaining states are decreased. However, this update cannot be very aggressive given
that there is a non-negligible chance for a careless error. This fact motivated the addition for each question
of a button labeled “I don’t know” (or “I haven’t learned it yet”), which the student can choose if
she has no familiarity with the item. Selecting the button results in a substantial increase in the probabilities
of the states not containing the item, thereby decreasing the total number of questions required to uncover
the student’s state. On the other hand, the open-ended nature of an ALEKS question makes lucky guesses
very unlikely. So the update following a correct answer is also substantial3 .

   2 Regarding the latter concern, see Matayoshi et al. (2018) for evidence of a ‘fatigue effect’ experienced by students in ALEKS

assessments.
   3 See Definition 13.4.4 in Falmagne and Doignon (2011) for a formal description of the updating rule. Remark 13.4.5 discusses

a Bayesian interpretation of the update parameters of the rule that links them to the lucky guess and careless error rates of the
items. In agreement with overall empirical estimates of these error rates, the update parameters in ALEKS are about 35 for a



                                                                7
    We conclude this section with some specifics about what constitutes the learning of an item in the
student’s outer fringe. In the ALEKS learning mode, the student has access to a graphical list that presents
all the items in the student’s outer fringe and from which the student can select any item. Each item in the
list comes with a ‘learning progress bar’ and a numerical value, or ‘score’, summarizing it. The initial score of
an item is 0. When the student selects a new item to work on, an instance of that item with its explanation
is presented. After reading the explanation, the student receives another instance for actual practice. Each
time the student receives a new instance, she can either try to answer it or read the explanation for that
instance. Afterward, the student gets another instance to practice, and so on. As the student practices the
item, its score is updated according to the following rules.

     A correct answer increases the score by 1, but the second correct answer on a streak of two consecutive
      correct answers increases the score by 2 (for a total of 3).

     An incorrect answer decreases the score by 1, unless the score was already at 0.

     Reading an explanation does not change the score. However, reading the explanation when the new
      instance follows a correct answer breaks the streak of correct answers. So there is an implicit encour-
      agement to try to answer without falling back on the explanation.

    An item is considered to be (provisionally) learned, and is added to the student’s knowledge state, when
the student reaches a preset target score. Most often an item requires a target score of 5 to be learned. There
are two cases when a target score of 3 is enough and the learning is fast-tracked. The first case is when the
item is classified as uncertain following the initial assessment. The other case is when the item has been
learned previously but then removed from the student’s knowledge state following a progress assessment.
Five consecutive incorrect answers is considered a failed learning attempt. In that case, the student is gently
prompted to try another item.


2. Evaluating the ALEKS assessment

    In this section we give a detailed evaluation of the ALEKS initial assessment. We choose the initial
assessment because it is the most challenging type of assessment for the system, as ALEKS has little to
no information about the student to begin. Though the initial assessment for each ALEKS course runs via
the algorithm described in Section 1.3 above, the student’s experience in taking an initial assessment will
vary based on the level of the student, the set of items in the particular course, the knowledge structure
in place for those items, and other factors. With this in mind, we examine here the initial assessment for


correct answer, 5 for an incorrect answer, and 50 for “I don’t know”, with some variation from one course to another.




                                                              8
three courses that differ in a number of such factors. The three courses, which are introduced in Section
1.2, are Sixth-Grade Math (which covers mostly basic arithmetic and geometry), College Algebra (which
covers exponentials and logarithms, matrices, and polynomial and rational functions), and College Placement
(which covers areas such as proportions and percentages, integer arithmetic, linear and quadratic functions,
polynomial and rational functions, exponentials and logarithms, and trigonometry). We note that College
Placement has the most student use of any ALEKS course, involves the greatest diversity of student ability,
and has an average initial assessment result nearest the “middle” of the course. For these reasons, the College
Placement initial assessment is an especially useful and important one to study, and it is examined further
in Section 2.3 below.
   In the analyses that follow in Sections 2.2 and 2.3, data from over 3.1 million initial assessments gath-
ered from 2012 until early 2020 were used. Detailed demographic information about the students, such as
information regarding gender, age, geographic location, or college major, is not available. However, these
ALEKS courses are taken predominantly by students in the United States, and there is roughly one student
represented per initial assessment taken. (Some students in the College Placement sample took more than
one initial assessment.) For the College Placement sample, each of the students was enrolled or soon-to-be
enrolled at a college or university and took the assessment for the purpose of being placed in an appropriate
mathematics course.


2.1. A key statistic: the extra problem in assessment

   In each ALEKS assessment, one item is chosen uniformly at random from the set of items being used in
the course, and the item is presented to the student as an assessment question. For the student, nothing
distinguishes that extra problem from the other problems in the assessment. The answer to the extra
problem is ignored by the adaptive assessment and does not affect its results. Rather, the extra problem and
its answer are stored separately and later used to evaluate and improve the ALEKS system. Throughout
this section and the next one, we will resort extensively to statistics built upon the extra problem to evaluate
miscellaneous aspects of the ALEKS system.


2.2. Evaluating the assessment using standard measures

   Section 2.2 treats an ALEKS assessment as a probabilistic classifier that attempts to predict, for each
item, whether or not the item is contained in the student’s knowledge state. Thus, for the most part, rather
than looking at aspects of the assessment specific to KST, our intent is to evaluate the performance of the
assessment using standard measures that can be applied to any model that makes probabilistic classifications.
To perform this evaluation, we use the following procedure. At all times during an assessment, the ALEKS
system has, for each item, an estimated probability that the item is contained in the student’s state. To
evaluate these estimates, we can compare the probabilities with the student responses to the extra problems;


                                                        9
in what follows, we encode these responses as either “1” (for a correct answer) or “0” (for an incorrect
answer or an “I don’t know” response). It is worth noting that each probability estimate from the ALEKS
system corresponds to the likelihood that the student knows an item, rather than being an estimate of
the probability that the student answers the item correctly. However, without access to the student’s true
knowledge state, we use the actual responses as a reasonable proxy to evaluate the probability estimates.
    For the initial assessment for each of the three courses, we use the probability estimates returned at
the end of the assessment to evaluate the following measures: the area under the receiver operating charac-
teristic curve (AUROC), the point biserial correlation, and the accuracy. The AUROC is commonly used
in evaluating probabilistic classifiers, and one of its strengths is that it is not sensitive to class imbalances
(Fawcett, 2006). The point biserial correlation is a special case of the Pearson correlation coefficient in
which one variable is dichotomous (i.e., the student response) and the other variable is continuous (i.e., the
probability estimate from the ALEKS system). The AUROC and point biserial correlation use the exact
probability scores. For the accuracy computation, any probability at or above 0.5 is assigned to the positive
class (a correct answer) and anything below 0.5 is assigned to the negative class (an incorrect answer or an “I
don’t know” response); note that this assignment of classes is a standard procedure used to evaluate binary
classifiers which does not necessarily correspond to the actual classifications by the ALEKS assessment. (We
analyze the actual classifications of the assessment in more detail shortly.)4
    The results are shown in Table 2, where extra problem correct rate, or simply correct rate, refers to the
proportion of all responses to the extra problem that are graded as correct by the ALEKS system. We see
that the strongest overall results are from the College Placement assessment. This fact is not unexpected,
as College Placement is a specialized assessment that has the sole purpose of placing a student into the
appropriate college-level mathematics course; as such, the items used in the course are chosen for being
quality assessment questions. On the other hand, for the College Algebra and Sixth-Grade Math courses,
which are learning courses, the emphasis is on fully covering the subject matter so that students can have a
complete learning experience. Because of this, the items in these latter courses are designed to be used for
both assessment and learning purposes; a natural consequence of this split focus is that the overall assessment
performance of the items, while still acceptable, is not quite as strong as in the College Placement assessment.
    Next, in Table 3 we have partitioned the data points based on the actual classification made by the
assessment (either in-state, out-of-state, or uncertain), for all three of our example ALEKS courses. For


   4 We also evaluated the performance of the assessment using the Matthews correlation coefficient (Matthews, 1975), which is

recommended as a good overall measure for evaluating binary classifiers (Boughorbel et al., 2017; Chicco, 2017; Powers, 2011).
However, as the results were very similar to those obtained from the use of the point biserial correlation, we have omitted the
Matthews correlation from our analysis. This similarity is perhaps not too surprising, as the Matthews correlation is another
special case of the Pearson correlation coefficient.




                                                              10
                                 Table 2: Statistics for ALEKS initial assessments


                Course               N        Correct rate        AUROC       Point biserial         Accuracy

          Sixth-Grade Math        162,900          0.392            0.875            0.634            0.801
             College Algebra      174,073          0.322            0.863            0.602            0.808
          College Placement      2,775,432         0.509            0.889            0.671            0.814

                Table 3: Statistics for ALEKS initial assessments, partitioned by item classification


                                      In-state                   Out-of-state                  Uncertain
             Course
                                              Correct                       Correct                     Correct
                               Proportion                  Proportion                  Proportion
                                                 rate                        rate                         rate

        Sixth-Grade Math          0.333          0.794          0.497        0.110           0.170       0.428
          College Algebra         0.283          0.740          0.610        0.110           0.107       0.427
       College Placement          0.474          0.838          0.358        0.102           0.168       0.449


each classification category, Table 3 includes the proportion of items in the category, as well as the extra
problem correct rate for those items. Again, we can see that College Placement has the best performance;
for the in-state items, it has the highest correct rate (if an item is classified as in-state, it is desirable that
the correct rate be high), while it then has the lowest correct rate for the out-of-state items (if an item is
classified as out-of-state, one would expect it not to be answered correctly very often). Note that for the
three courses, the correct rates for the uncertain items range between 0.42 and 0.45; assuming that there is
some amount of careless error in these responses, it seems plausible that the proportion of these uncertain
items actually known by students is somewhere around 0.5, which is the desired value. If, instead, the
proportion of uncertain items actually known by students were very high or very low, this would be a sign
that the classifications made by the ALEKS assessment are not well-calibrated.
   For our next two analyses, we focus on College Placement which, for the reasons outlined in the in-
troduction to Section 2, is a natural choice for an in-depth analysis. First, Figure 1 shows the evolution
of the AUROC, point biserial, and accuracy values over the course of the assessment. Specifically, for the
2,688,472 College Placement assessments in the dataset that run for the full 29 questions, the values of the
three measures are plotted at each point in the assessment (i.e., after each question). As shown, the values
converge early in the assessment, with the changes being minimal after question 10. Essentially, this means
that the assessment quickly obtains a fairly accurate picture of the student’s knowledge, and then uses the
remaining questions to fine-tune this picture.
   We next look at the performance of the College Placement assessment at the level of the individual


                                                           11
                      1.0

                      0.8

                      0.6

                      0.4

                      0.2
                                      AUROC
                                      Point biserial
                      0.0             Accuracy
                            0             5            10        15          20          25           30
                                                        Question number

                                Figure 1: Classifier measure values by assessment question number.



items. With its fixed set of 314 items from which the extra problems are chosen uniformly at random, the
College Placement dataset has on average nearly 9000 data points per item.5 For each item, the value of the
measure (AUROC, point biserial correlation, or accuracy) may be compared to the correct rate for the item.
Figures 2a–2c show the results for the AUROC, point biserial correlation, and accuracy, respectively. For
the AUROC and point biserial correlation, the student’s response to the extra problem is being compared
directly to the probability returned by the ALEKS system, while for the accuracy, this probability is rounded
to the nearest integer (either zero or one).
    We begin by looking at the AUROC measure in Figure 2a. The items have a wide range of correct rates,
so the AUROC is recommended since, as mentioned previously, it is not sensitive to class imbalances. This
is supported by the fact that the trend of the AUROC values is mostly flat and does not have a significant
dependence on the correct rate. The values seem to degrade only for the items with the highest correct
rates; since, again, the AUROC is not sensitive to class imbalances, this appears to be strong evidence that
the performance of the assessment degrades when making predictions on the easiest items.

   5 This is in sharp contrast to ALEKS courses such as Sixth-Grade Math and College Algebra, for which the set of items

appearing as extra problems is not fixed, as instructors are free to choose the items that appear in these courses. This results in
a large proportion of items appearing rarely, or not at all, as extra problems, causing complications for an item-level analysis.




                                                                12
        1.0                                                                                     1.0
        0.8                                                                                     0.8




                                                                               Point biserial
        0.6                                                                                     0.6
AUROC




        0.4                                                                                     0.4
        0.2                                                                                     0.2
        0.0                                                                                     0.0
              0.0      0.2     0.4      0.6            0.8    1.0                                     0.0    0.2      0.4      0.6       0.8   1.0
                       Extra problem correct rate                                                            Extra problem correct rate
                              (a) AUROC                                                                      (b) Point biserial correlation




                                                1.0
                                                0.8
                                                0.6
                                     Accuracy




                                                0.4
                                                0.2
                                                0.0
                                                      0.0    0.2    0.4             0.6                0.8    1.0
                                                             Extra problem correct rate
                                                                    (c) Accuracy


                    Figure 2: AUROC, point biserial correlation, and accuracy versus extra problem correct rate.




                                                                          13
   Next, we turn to the point biserial correlation in Figure 2b. In contrast to the AUROC measure, the
point biserial correlation has been shown to depend on the base rate of the dichotomous variable (Cohen,
1983; McGrath and Meyer, 2006). In our case, the base rate of the dichotomous variable corresponds to
the extra problem correct rate. This dependence appears in the form of a pronounced curve in Figure 2b,
where the point biserial correlations for the easiest and hardest items are lowest; the highest point biserial
correlations then appear for the items in the middle range of difficulty. One final observation is that, while
the point biserial correlations are low for the hardest items, the values for the easiest items appear to be
even lower; this is consistent with the behavior of the AUROC measure, for which the lowest values also
appeared for the easiest items.
   Lastly, the plot for accuracy is displayed in Figure 2c. As the issues with accuracy values computed
on imbalanced data are well known (Provost and Fawcett, 1997; Provost et al., 1998), unsurprisingly the
accuracy plot also shows a pronounced curve, albeit in the opposite direction of the curve for the point
biserial correlation. That is, the accuracy values are highest when the class imbalance is highest (i.e., for the
easiest and hardest items) and lowest when the data are more balanced (i.e., for the middle difficulty items).
   Based on the above analysis, there appears to be evidence that the performance of the ALEKS assessment
degrades for the easiest items, that is, the items with the highest extra problem correct rates. A possible
explanation for this is the following. In ALEKS, careless errors are much more common than lucky guesses;
this is due to the fact that the majority of ALEKS items require an open-ended response, while relatively
few require only multiple choice or true/false responses. Because of this, very difficult items have relatively
little noise, since most students do not know how to solve them and are likely to give a wrong answer (again,
since lucky guesses are rare). On the other hand, many students know the easy items but may make careless
errors when solving them. When one considers this, along with the fact that discriminating students who
know from those who do not know these easy items is difficult (simply because most students do in fact
know these items), it is perhaps not surprising that the predictive performance of the assessment degrades
for the easiest items.

2.3. Evaluating the assessment using knowledge state layers
   We now look at how the extra problem rate is affected by the position of the item relative to the knowledge
state. To do this, we employ the concept of the layers of a knowledge state. Following Doble et al. (2019),
we define the layers of a knowledge state via the surmise relation.

Definition 2.1. Let (Q, K) be a knowledge structure. For any item q ∈ Q, let Kq denote the family
{K ∈ K | q ∈ K}. The surmise relation - is a relation on Q defined by

                                          q - r ⇐⇒ Kq ⊇ Kr .                                                (2.1)

We can now define the layers of a knowledge state.


                                                       14
Definition 2.2. Let (Q, K) be a learning space. As such, it is known that the surmise relation is a partial
order (that is, reflexive, antisymmetric, and transitive). We define the outer layer S ol of a subset S of Q as

                                     S ol = {q 6∈ S | ∀r 6∈ S, r - q ⇒ r = q}.

The outer layer of S is thus the set of the minimal items with respect to the restriction of - to Q \ S.
Similarly, we define the inner layer S il of a subset S of Q as

                                     S il = {q ∈ S | ∀r ∈ S, q - r ⇒ r = q}.

The inner layer of S is thus the set of the maximal items with respect to the restriction of - to S. We define
recursively the nth outer layer K oln of a state K as

                                      K ol1    = K ol ,
                                                          n−1
                                                          [
                                      K oln    =   (K ∪         K oli )ol if n ≥ 2.
                                                          i=1

Similarly, we define the nth inner layer K iln of K as

                                       K il1   = K il ,
                                                          n−1
                                                          [
                                      K iln    =   (K \         K ili )il if n ≥ 2.
                                                          i=1

It follows immediately from the definition of outer layer that, for any state K and any item q 6∈ K, there is
a natural number n such that q ∈ K oln . Moreover, the outer layers of K are order-preserving with respect
to the surmise relation: for all q, r 6∈ K, with q ∈ K oli and r ∈ K olj ,

                                                   q - r ⇒ i ≤ j.

Similarly, the inner layers of K are order-reversing with respect to the surmise relation: for all q, r ∈ K,
with q ∈ K ili and r ∈ K ilj ,
                                                   q - r ⇒ i ≥ j.

The notion of layer exposed here has similarity with but is distinct from the notion of nth -fringe introduced
in Hockemeyer (1997). Additionally, in Appendix A of Cardinal et al. (2013) the “levels” of a partially
ordered set are discussed, and this concept is equivalent to the outer layers of the empty set specifically
when the knowledge space is defined by a partial order. The exact relation between layers and fringes of a
knowledge state is examined in Doble et al. (2019). The layers can be thought of as a partition of the items in
Q based on their difficulty and complexity in relation to a knowledge state K. Empirically, this can be seen
in Figure 3a, which shows the correct rates for the College Placement extra problems as a function of the
knowledge state layer. For this analysis, we exclude any extra problems that were classified in the uncertain


                                                          15
category at the end of the assessment; this gives a clearer picture of the different behavior of the items
depending on whether or not they are in the student’s knowledge state.6 The correct rate essentially starts
at zero for the outermost layers, and then begins to increase around outer layer 8, eventually arriving at a
value of roughly 0.27 for outer layer 1. There is then a large jump from outer layer 1 to inner layer 1, with
inner layer 1 having a correct rate of roughly 0.7. The correct rate then continues to increase throughout
the rest of the inner layers.
    Figure 3b shows the corresponding rates for the “I don’t know” responses (that is, the proportion of
all responses to the extra problem for which the student does not attempt to answer but chooses “I don’t
know”). Note that these rates behave somewhat differently from the correct rates. To start, the “I don’t
know” rates for the outer layers show larger differences compared to the correct rates, with the overall change
being slightly more than 0.4; by comparison, the overall change in the correct rate for the outer layers is
less than 0.3. Then, moving to the inner layers, we see markedly different behavior, as the “I don’t know”
rates are almost constant, showing very little change from the inner fringe onward. This is an interesting
contrast, as it signals that students appear to recognize when they do in fact know how to solve an item.
On the other hand, understanding the behavior in the outer layers is complicated by the fact that College
Placement is a placement exam, and in such a context students may feel pressure to attempt answers, even
if they do not know the content in the item.
    In regard to this last concern, Figures 3c and 3d show the corresponding plots for the College Algebra
course. While the correct rates in Figure 3c are roughly similar to the correct rates in Figure 3a, the “I
don’t know” rates in Figure 3d diverge from the corresponding rates in Figure 3b. In particular, the College
Algebra “I don’t know” rates reach a maximum of about 0.8, much higher than for College Placement. This
would seem to support the hypothesis that students taking the College Placement assessment are motivated
to attempt answers, even if items are inaccessible to them, as a higher score may mean placement into a
more advanced course. On the other hand, College Algebra students are already enrolled in the course at the
time of the assessment, and the purpose of the assessment is to ascertain their knowledge of the course (as
opposed to placing them in a different one). The typical College Algebra student will likely have different
motivations from the typical College Placement student when taking the initial assessment, and the “I don’t
know” rates seem to reflect this.
    These figures can also be instructive when considering the validity of the item classifications made by
the assessment. Specifically, the drop in the “I don’t know” rate from the outer layers to the inner layers

   6 In practice, the majority of the uncertain items are in the outer fringe (outer layer 1) of the knowledge state returned by

the assessment. As discussed previously, a large portion of these uncertain items are actually known by the student, with the
assessment simply lacking enough information to make this classification. As such, including the uncertain items in the outer
layers inflates the correct rate, and removing them gives a better estimate of the behavior of the “true” outer layers.




                                                               16
  1.0                                                            1.0
  0.8                                                            0.8
  0.6                                                            0.6
  0.4                                                            0.4
  0.2                                                            0.2
  0.0                                                            0.0
          15    10    5 0 5 10               15                         15    10     5     0     5     10   15
                     ← outer | inner →                                             ← outer | inner →

                          (a)                                                            (b)




  1.0                                                            1.0
  0.8                                                            0.8
  0.6                                                            0.6
  0.4                                                            0.4
  0.2                                                            0.2
  0.0                                                            0.0
          15    10    5 0 5 10               15                         15    10     5     0     5     10   15
                     ← outer | inner →                                             ← outer | inner →

                           (c)                                                           (d)


Figure 3: Extra problem correct rate (left) and “I don’t know” rate (right) by fringe layer for College Placement (top)

and College Algebra (bottom).




                                                          17
provides evidence that the in-state and out-of-state classifications made by the system are justified. That is,
since students are not aware of these classifications during the assessment, the observed difference in their
behavior when an item is out-of-state (i.e., the outer layers) compared to when it is in-state (i.e., the inner
layers) provides empirical validity for these classifications. Additionally, the overall lack of “I don’t know”
responses for the inner layers seems to indicate that it is relatively rare for a student to truly have no idea
how to solve an in-state item.
   We next look at the extra problem correct rates for a few example items of varying difficulty. For context,
Figure 4 displays a histogram of the correct rates for the College Placement items. Figure 5a then shows the
correct rates by layer for an item with an overall correct rate of 0.15; from the histogram, we can see that a
correct rate of 0.15 puts the item on the more difficult side. The difficulty of the item can also be seen in
Figure 5a, where the majority of the data are from the outer layers, with inner layers 1 and 2 being the only
inner layers with any significant amount of data; in other words, the item is most often categorized as being
out of the student’s knowledge state, indicating that it is relatively rare for students to know the item.
   Figure 5b shows the layers for an item with a correct rate of 0.47, putting the item somewhere in the
middle range of difficulty; this relative level of difficulty can also be seen in the figure, as the data points are
balanced between the inner and outer layers. In Figure 5c we then have an example of an easier item, whose
correct rate is 0.94. Once again, the difficulty of the item is indicated by the layer information, as the figure
contains data points only for the inner layers.
   We conclude this subsection by pointing out the contrast between the correct rates by layer presented
above and the correct rates predicted by the basic local independence model (BLIM) (Definition A.7). Under
the BLIM, the extra problem correct rate for an item q should equal the lucky guess rate ηq for all outer
layers, and it should equal 1 minus the careless error rate, 1 − βq , for all inner layers. Figures 5a–5c show
plots of the extra problem correct rates by layer for three individual items. These plots do not have enough
data points for all layers. Nevertheless, all three plots look different from the 1-step functions predicted by
the BLIM. If the predictions of in-state and out-of-state made by the ALEKS system are accurate, then
these plots may serve as evidence that the lucky guess and careless error parameters vary by the knowledge
state of the student, and therefore are not independent of the student’s knowledge state as assumed for the
BLIM.
   Recall Figure 3a, which is the plot of the extra problem correct rates with all items aggregated. It has a
characteristic “S” shape. The “S” shape is also present in similar graphs presented in Doble et al. (2019),
where items are aggregated according to difficulty level. Traces of the “S” shape are also found in Figures 5a–
5c. These plots suggest that a way of modeling the correct rates using information from the knowledge state
(via the layers) is by using generalized sigmoid curves, also known as Richards curves (Richards, 1959; Lei
and Zhang, 2004). These curves would require 3 to 5 parameters per curve, and they would not cause an



                                                        18
                  0.08
                  0.07
                  0.06
                  0.05
                  0.04
                  0.03
                  0.02
                  0.01
                  0.00
                          0.0           0.2          0.4          0.6          0.8          1.0
                                              Extra problem correct rate

             Figure 4: Relative frequency histogram of the extra problem correct rate for College Placement.



explosion in the number of parameters (a concern raised in Remark 11.1.3 in Falmagne and Doignon (2011)).
   On the other hand, the in-state and out-of-state classifications by the ALEKS system almost certainly
are made in the presence of inaccuracies in the knowledge structure and noise in student responses. Some
of the evidence against the BLIM in these plots can be attributed to these factors. We did not attempt to
mitigate these factors with an eye toward testing the BLIM in the current work, and more careful study is
necessary.


3. Evaluating the ALEKS learning mode

   To complement the analysis of the ALEKS assessment given in Section 2, we now examine the other
principal aspect of the ALEKS system: the learning mode. As described in Section 1.2, once a student
finishes the initial assessment, she is placed into the learning mode, during which she practices items in the
outer fringe of her knowledge state. After a certain amount of time or items practiced, she is given a progress
assessment to verify her learning, and after the assessment the learning mode resumes.

3.1. Learning an item from the student’s outer fringe

   We outlined in Section 1.2 the scoring system that measures a student’s progress while she practices an
item from her outer fringe. At the time the ALEKS system prompts the student to take a new assessment,


                                                           19
1.0                                                                   1.0
0.8                                                                   0.8
0.6                                                                   0.6
0.4                                                                   0.4
0.2                                                                   0.2
0.0                                                                   0.0
      15   10    5     0        5        10        15                       15        10        5       0      5    10   15
                ← outer | inner →                                                               ← outer | inner →

                       (a)                                                                            (b)




                              1.0
                              0.8
                              0.6
                              0.4
                              0.2
                              0.0
                                    15        10        5       0      5         10        15
                                                        ← outer | inner →

                                                              (c)


Figure 5: Extra problem correct rate by fringe layer for a high, medium, and low difficulty item, respectively.




                                                              20
each item that the student attempted to learn since the previous assessment can be classified in one of
four categories: (i) the item was considered provisionally learned (‘success’) and was added to the student’s
knowledge state; (ii) the learning attempt was considered unsuccessful (‘failure’) and the student was invited
to try another item; (iii) the student practiced the item, but ALEKS had not determined it yet a success or a
failure (‘incomplete’); and (iv) the student selected the item, but left it immediately after seeing the example
explanation and never returned to practice it (‘no activity’). This last category is counted as distinct from
the ‘incomplete’ category.
   Table 4 reports the proportion of each category for the three ALEKS learning courses under study: Sixth-
Grade Math, Algebra I, and College Algebra. The data come from the usage of these three courses over the
years 2016 − 2019. In this table, all learning activity for an item between two consecutive assessments (or
between the last assessment and the time all course activity ends) is represented by a single data point. If an
item is re-attempted following an assessment, it will generate a second data point. At any time, the student
may decide to suspend (or abandon) practicing an item by picking up another item available from the outer
fringe. If the student revisits a previously suspended item before a new assessment takes place, the scoring
for the item is resumed from when the student left the item. How often the practicing of an item happened
without such a revisit is reported in parentheses for each category in Table 4. As the assessment may add
or subtract items relative to the student’s knowledge state before the assessment, the item scores are reset
for all items following the assessment.

Table 4:    Relative frequency of the classification of the learning attempts for each course. In parentheses is the
proportion of the attempts in the category that did not involve a suspension with revisit.


           Product             N            Success             Failure         Incomplete         No activity

  Sixth-Grade Math         38,928,733    0.809   (0.845)    0.041   (0.516)   0.103    (0.701)   0.047   (1.000)
              Algebra I    21,769,811    0.841   (0.884)    0.030   (0.578)   0.085    (0.726)   0.044   (1.000)
     College Algebra       15,749,089    0.943   (0.927)    0.015   (0.613)   0.032    (0.725)   0.010   (1.000)


   In a general sense, the success rate can be seen as measuring the appropriateness of the outer fringes,
and so, indirectly, of the underlying knowledge structures. We observe that the success rate increases with
the grade level of the course (the age of the students), whereas each of the other three categories decrease
with the grade level. On the other hand, assessment results in Tables 2 and 3 do not point to Sixth-Grade
Math as having a less appropriate knowledge structure than College Algebra. It is reasonable to assume
that the results in Table 4 reflect instead behavioral differences between the populations. A large fraction
of College Algebra students are adults who enroll at two-year colleges with the goal of gaining higher-
education credentials to improve their employment prospects. By contrast, Sixth-Grade Math and Algebra I
are compulsory courses taken by minors of varying degrees of maturity and motivation. As the populations


                                                           21
age and become more self-selected, we observe an increased level of dedication and focus on learning. This
interpretation is also consistent with the greater proportion of uninterrupted learning attempts from Sixth-
Grade Math to College Algebra.
   We now take a more detailed view of the Algebra I data from Table 4. Algebra I is chosen for this analysis
as the ‘middle’ of the three courses. There are about 1100 items available to the instructor for inclusion in
the Algebra I course. The most commonly used 500 items have more than 10,000 learning attempts each,
and together account for more than 90% of the data. Figure 6a shows the relative frequency of each category
(success, failure, incomplete, no activity) for these 500 most commonly used items. The items are ordered
on the horizontal axis by increasing rate of success; 92.4% of the items have a success rate of 0.70 or higher,
and the median success rate is 0.863. A small number of items, however, exhibit low success rates, with 14
of them falling below 0.60. There are several factors that may negatively impact the success rate of an item.
One factor is a possible deficiency of the knowledge structure with respect to the item: the item may not
belong in the outer fringe of the knowledge states from which the learning is attempted. Other factors may
come from the item itself. For example, the item’s explanation may need improvement, or there may be
instances that are not representative of the item and are problematic for the student to answer successfully.
Improving the low success rate of an item may require resolving these respective issues.
   The data for Algebra I in Table 4 come from about 196,000 students, 77% of whom had at least 20
learning attempts over the length of the course. Figure 6b is similar to the previous figure, but this time
the horizontal axis shows a random sample of 500 students with at least 20 learning attempts. (A sample
was used, rather than the entire data set, for clarity in the figure.) The median student in the sample had a
success rate of 0.865. The figure illustrates not only the differences in performance (that is, in success rate)
among students, but also the differences in behavior. For instance, two students with similar success rates
can differ tremendously in their rates of incomplete versus failure.


3.2. Retention in progress assessments and forgetting curves

   We now examine the relationship between the retention of knowledge and the layers of a knowledge state.
Specifically, we look at the famous Ebbinghaus forgetting curves (Averell and Heathcote, 2011; Ebbinghaus,
1885) in relation to different knowledge state layers. Previous work has shown that the retention of knowledge
in ALEKS changes as a function of the time since the item was learned in the learning mode (Matayoshi
et al., 2018, 2019). We define retention as the act of answering an item correctly when it appears as an
extra problem at a point in time after the item is learned. We then say that the retention rate is the correct
answer rate on these extra problems.
   Starting from a dataset composed of the complete ALEKS learning and assessment profiles of 6,701,233
students drawn from the entire spectrum of ALEKS courses over the years 2016 − 2019, we extract 8,352,006
extra problems that fit our definition of retention given in the previous paragraph (i.e., the items were


                                                      22
   1.0                                                            1.0
   0.8                                                            0.8
   0.6                                                            0.6
   0.4                                   No activity              0.4                               No activity
                                         Incomplete                                                 Incomplete
   0.2                                   Failure                  0.2                               Failure
                                         Success                                                    Success
   0.0                                                            0.0
         0     100     200         300       400       500              0   100   200         300       400       500
                             (a)                                                        (b)


Figure 6: Learning categorizations for the 500 most commonly used Algebra I items and for a random sample of 500

Algebra I students, respectively. In each figure, the relative frequencies of the four categories are stacked and add
to 1.


learned in the ALEKS system before appearing as an extra problem in an assessment). For each of these
extra problems we determine which inner layer the item appeared in when the item was encountered as the
extra problem, and then we plot the retention rate for each layer as a function of the time since the item
was learned.
    The results are shown in Figure 7, where we can see that the curves are monotonically increasing as a
function of the inner layer. Additionally, there are some interesting differences in the shapes of the forgetting
curves. The first inner layer curve (Layer 1) has a steep drop within the first several days, and then flattens
out at a correct rate of roughly 0.6. The second inner layer curve (Layer 2) has less of an initial decline,
and then stays much higher, ending at about 0.67. In the subsequent inner layer curves this initial decline
continues to lessen, with the final curve (representing inner layers greater than or equal to five) being mostly
flat and ending with a rate of about 0.8. Figures 8 and 9 show the analogous curves for “I don’t know” and
incorrect responses, where we can again see that the response rates are very much dependent on the layer.
    Thus, it is clear that the position of an item in the inner layers is strongly related to the retention and
forgetting of that item. This makes sense as, all else being equal, the “deeper” an item gets in the knowledge
state, the more potential there is for the state to contain related material that builds on the item. This
related material would, presumably, have the effect of solidifying the knowledge associated with the item,
resulting in higher retention. (See Matayoshi et al. (2020) for an analysis of how the learning of related
material can act as a type of retrieval practice.)




                                                             23
                       1.0

                       0.8

                       0.6
     Correct rate




                       0.4
                                      Layer 1
                       0.2            Layer 2
                                      Layer 3
                                      Layer 4
                       0.0            Layer ≥ 5
                                0        10       20        30        40       50        60       70
                                                          Time (days)

             Figure 7: Forgetting curves (i.e., correct response curves) conditioned on the inner layer.




                                      Layer 1
                      0.12            Layer 2
                                      Layer 3
                      0.10            Layer 4
                                      Layer ≥ 5
"I don't know" rate




                      0.08

                      0.06

                      0.04

                      0.02

                      0.00
                                0        10       20        30        40       50        60       70
                                                          Time (days)

                             Figure 8: “I don’t know” response curves conditioned on the inner layer.



                                                                 24
                               1.0                                                            Layer 1
                                                                                              Layer 2
                                                                                              Layer 3
                               0.8                                                            Layer 4
                                                                                              Layer ≥ 5
              Incorrect rate

                               0.6

                               0.4

                               0.2

                               0.0
                                     0        10        20       30        40        50        60          70
                                                                Time (days)

                                     Figure 9: Incorrect response curves conditioned on the inner layer.



4. Discussion

   As an implementation of knowledge space theory, the ALEKS system had to solve problems of scale not
directly addressed by the theory. One issue is the scale of the domain of knowledge. Comprehensive content
coverage of a typical course requires hundreds of items. Another issue is the scale of usage. ALEKS serves
millions of students yearly. At any given time, tens of thousands of them can be simultaneously engaged
in a knowledge assessment or in the learning of an item. Solving these issues remains an ongoing process.
While this paper leaves out the technical and engineering aspects brought by these challenges, it outlines
some of the solutions as they relate to the theory. There are also features of ALEKS that lie outside the
direct scope of KST. The notion of outer fringe drives which items are accessible to the student for learning,
but what constitutes the actual learning of an item is shaped by evolving heuristics. Similarly, the cycle
of learning and assessment is not intrinsically a KST concept, but is supported by findings from cognitive
psychology (Dunlosky et al., 2013) and the emerging field of learning science (Feldman, 2020). Critically,
however, all design decisions were made as to remain consistent with the formal framework of KST.
   The work presented here leverages the large amount of available data to analyze the extent to which
practice conforms to theory. Section 2 evaluates the performance of the ALEKS initial assessment with
respect to several measures, one of which relies on the concept of layers of a knowledge state. The data may



                                                                      25
be viewed as questioning the assumptions of the basic local independence model, a mainstay of the research
in KST. According to the BLIM, the conditional answer to an item given the knowledge state of the student
is only determined by two parameters, the careless error rate and the lucky guess rate of the item, with no
dependence on the knowledge state. The data instead suggest a high sensitivity to the actual knowledge
state. But they also suggest that this dependency can be simply captured by the relative position of the
item to the state as defined by its layer. Such a dependency can be modeled by a sigmoid function having
as few as three parameters. Exploring this path would be the object of further study. In Section 3, we drew
again on the notion of layers to analyze the retention of learned items. We found a monotonic dependency
between rate of retention of an item and its inner layer relative to the student’s knowledge state at the
time retention is tested. Specifically, when items are positioned in the deeper inner layers of a knowledge
state, there is an apparent reinforcement effect at work, in which the items are retained at an increasingly
higher rate. Along the way, we also noticed effects in the data better explained by behavioral differences
between student populations. Usage of the “I don’t know” answer, introduced purely for the efficiency of the
knowledge assessment, turned out to be indicative of the perceived stake students place in the assessment: a
higher stake assessment such as College Placement is associated with a lower usage of the option. Similarly,
the aggregate success rate for learning an item in one’s outer fringe increases monotonically with the course
grade.
   In conclusion, the paper aimed to survey several of the challenges arising in a large-scale application of
a tutoring system that must meet the pedagogical expectations of students and instructors. It is our hope
that the findings presented here validate knowledge space theory as the model on which the system rests.
Moreover we believe that the practical considerations discussed in the paper and the methods introduced to
analyze the data will in turn stimulate new research in knowledge space theory.


Acknowledgments

   We are grateful to Andrew Rast for useful discussions.


References

Averell, L., Heathcote, A., 2011. The form of the forgetting curve and the fate of memories. Journal of
  Mathematical Psychology 55, 25–35.

Bae, C.L., Therriault, D.J., Redifer, J.L., 2019. Investigating the testing effect: Retrieval as a characteristic
  of effective study strategies. Learning and Instruction 60, 206–214.

Baxter, R., Thibodeau, J., 2011. Does the use of intelligent learning and assessment software enhance the
  acquisition of financial accounting knowledge? Issues in Accounting Education 26, 647–656.


                                                       26
Boughorbel, S., Jarray, F., El-Anbari, M., 2017. Optimal classifier for imbalanced data using Matthews
  correlation coefficient metric. PloS one 12, e0177678.

Cardinal, J., Fiorini, S., Joret, G., Jungers, R.M., Munro, J.I., 2013. Sorting under partial information
  (without the ellipsoid algorithm). Combinatorica 33, 655–697.

Chicco, D., 2017. Ten quick tips for machine learning in computational biology. BioData mining 10, 35.

Cohen, J., 1983. The cost of dichotomization. Applied Psychological Measurement 7, 249–253.

Craig, S., Anderson, C., Bargagloitti, A., Graesser, A., Okwumabua, T., Sterbinsky, A., Hu, X., 2011.
  Learning with ALEKS: The impact of students attendance in a mathematics after-school program, in:
  Artificial Intelligence in Education, pp. 435–437.

Craig, S., Hu, X., Graesser, A., Bargagliotti, A., Sterbinsky, A., Cheney, K., Okwumabua, T., 2013. The
  impact of a technology-based mathematics after-school program using ALEKS on students’ knowledge and
  behaviors. Computers and Education 68, 495–504.

Desmarais, M.C., Maluf, A., Liu, J., 1995. User-expertise modeling with empirically derived probabilistic
  implication networks. User modeling and user-adapted interaction 5, 283–315.

Desmarais, M.C., Pu, X., 2005. A bayesian inference adaptive testing framework and its comparison with
  item response theory. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 15, 291–323.

Doble, C., Matayoshi, J., Cosyn, E., Uzun, H., Karami, A., 2019. A data-based simulation study of reliability
  for an adaptive assessment based on knowledge space theory. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence
  in Education 29, 258–282.

Doignon, J.P., Falmagne, J.C., 1985. Spaces for the assessment of knowledge. International Journal of
  Man-Machine Studies 23, 175–196.

Dunlosky, J., Rawson, K., Marsh, E., Nathan, M., Willingham, D., 2013. Improving students’ learning with
  effective learning techniques: Promising directions from cognitive and educational psychology. Psycholog-
  ical Science in the Public Interest 14, 14–58.

Ebbinghaus, H., 1885. Memory: A Contribution to Experimental Psychology. Originally published by
  Teachers College, Columbia University (1913), New York. Translated by Henry A. Ruger and Clara E.

Falmagne, J.C., Albert, D., Doble, C., Eppstein, D., Hu, X. (Eds.), 2013. Knowledge Spaces: Applications
  in Education. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg.

Falmagne, J.C., Doignon, J.P., 2011. Learning Spaces. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg.


                                                       27
Fang, Y., Ren, Z., Hu, X., Graesser, A., 2019. A meta-analysis of the effectiveness of ALEKS on learning.
  Educational Psychology 39, 1278–1292.

Fawcett, T., 2006. An introduction to ROC analysis. Pattern Recognition Letters 27, 861–874.

Feldman, R. (Ed.), 2020. Learning Science: Theory, Research, and Practice. McGraw-Hill Education.

Hagerty, G., Smith, S., Goodwin, D., 2010. Redesigning college algebra: Combining educational theory and
  web-based learning to improve student attitudes and performance. PRIMUS 20, 418–437.

Hickey, D., Robinson, J., Fiorini, S., Fang, Y., 2020. Internet-based alternatives for equitable preparation,
  access, and success in gateway courses. The Internet and Higher Education 44.

Hockemeyer, C., 1997. Using the basis of a knowledge space for determining the fringe of a knowledge state.
  Journal of Mathematical Psychology 41, 275–279.

Hockemeyer, C., 2020. Bibliography on Knowledge Spaces. Available at http://liinwww.ira.uka.de/
  bibliography/Ai/knowledge.spaces.html.

Hu, X., Luellen, J., Okwumabua, T., Xu, Y., Mo, L., 2007. Observational findings from a web-based
  intelligent tutoring system: Elimination of racial disparities in an undergraduate behavioral statistics
  course, in: Conference of the American Educational Research Association.

Huang, X., Craig, S., Xie, J., Graesser, A., Hu, X., 2016. Intelligent tutoring systems work as a math gap
  reducer in 6th grade after-school program. Learning and Individual Differences 47, 258–265.

Koppen, M., Doignon, J.P., 1990. How to build a knowledge space by querying an expert. Journal of
  Mathematical Psychology 34, 311–331.

Lei, Y., Zhang, S., 2004. Features and partial derivatives of Bertalanffy-Richards growth model in forestry.
  Nonlinear Analysis: Modelling and Control 1, 65–73.

Matayoshi, J., Granziol, U., Doble, C., Uzun, H., Cosyn, E., 2018. Forgetting curves and testing effect
  in an adaptive learning and assessment system, in: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on
  Educational Data Mining, pp. 607–612.

Matayoshi, J., Uzun, H., Cosyn, E., 2019. Deep (un)learning: Using neural networks to model retention
  and forgetting in an adaptive learning system, in: International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
  Education, Springer. pp. 258–269.

Matayoshi, J., Uzun, H., Cosyn, E., 2020. Studying retrieval practice in an intelligent tutoring system, in:
  Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Learning at Scale, ACM. pp. 51–62.


                                                     28
Matthews, B.W., 1975. Comparison of the predicted and observed secondary structure of T4 phage lysozyme.
  Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Protein Structure 405, 442–451.

McGrath, R.E., Meyer, G.J., 2006. When effect sizes disagree: the case of r and d. Psychological Methods
  11, 386.

McGraw Hill, 2020. ALEKS course products. Available at http://www.aleks.com/about_aleks/course_
  products.

Mojarad, S., Essa, A., Mojarad, S., Baker, R.S., 2018. Studying adaptive learning efficacy using propensity
  score matching, in: Companion Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Learning Analytics
  and Knowledge (LAK 18), pp. 5–9.

Powers, D.M., 2011. Evaluation: from precision, recall and F-measure to ROC, informedness, markedness
  and correlation. Journal of Machine Learning Technologies 2, 37–63.

Provost, F., Fawcett, T., 1997. Analysis and visualization of classifier performance: Comparison under
  imprecise class and cost distributions, in: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Knowledge
  Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 43–48.

Provost, F., Fawcett, T., Kohavi, R., 1998. The case against accuracy estimation while comparing induction
  algorithms, in: ICML Conference.

Rawson, K.A., Dunlosky, J., 2011. Optimizing schedules of retrieval practice for durable and efficient learning:
  How much is enough? Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 140, 283.

Reddy, A., Harper, M., 2013. Mathematics placement at the University of Illinois. PRIMUS 23, 683–702.

Richards, F., 1959. A flexible growth function for empirical use. Journal of Experimental Botany 2, 290–300.

Roediger III, H.L., Butler, A.C., 2011. The critical role of retrieval practice in long-term retention. Trends
  in Cognitive Sciences 15, 20–27.

Roediger III, H.L., Karpicke, J.D., 2006a. The power of testing memory: Basic research and implications
  for educational practice. Perspectives on Psychological Science 1, 181–210.

Roediger III, H.L., Karpicke, J.D., 2006b. Test-enhanced learning: Taking memory tests improves long-term
  retention. Psychological Science 17, 249–255.




                                                      29
Appendix

   We recall here a few major definitions and theorems of knowledge space theory. They can all be found
in Falmagne and Doignon (2011), sometimes in a slightly different form.

Definition A.1. A learning space is a knowledge structure (Q, K) that satisfies the following two conditions.
     (i)    If K ⊂ L are two knowledge states in K, with |L \ K| = n, then there is a chain of states
                                            K0 = K ⊂ K1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Kn = L
            such that Ki = Ki−1 ∪ {qi } with qi ∈ Q \ Ki−1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
     (ii)   If K ⊂ L are two knowledge states in K, with q ∈ Q \ K and K ∪ {q} ∈ K for some item q,
            then L ∪ {q} ∈ K.

Theorem A.2. For any K ∈ K, let K I and K O denote the inner and outer fringe of K, respectively. If K
is a learning space, then

                             ∀K, L ∈ K : (K I = LI and K O = LO ) ⇐⇒ K = L.



Definition A.3. Let (K, Q) be a knowledge structure and Q0 a nonempty proper subset of Q. The family

                                K|Q0 = {W ⊆ Q0 | W = K ∩ Q0 for some K ∈ K}

is called the projection of K on Q0 .

Theorem A.4. If (K, Q) is a learning space and Q0 a nonempty proper subset of Q, then (K|Q0 , Q0 ) is a
learning space.

Definition A.5. For any K, L ∈ K, let d(K, L) denote the set-symmetric distance between K and L. For
any integer n ≥ 0, the family {L ∈ K | d(K, L) ≤ n} is the n-neighborhood of K. For any sub-collection F
of K, the family {L ∈ K | d(K, L) ≤ n for some K in F} is the n-neighborhood of F.

Definition A.6. A probabilistic knowledge structure is a triple (Q, K, p) in which
     (i)    (Q, K) is a knowledge structure;
     (ii)   the mapping p : K → [0, 1] : K 7→ p(K) is a probability distribution on K;
            thus, for any K ∈ K, we have p(K) ≥ 0, and moreover, ΣK∈K p(K) = 1.

Definition A.7. The basic local independence model (BLIM) is a probabilistic knowledge structure (Q, K, p)
that satisfies the following conditions.
     (i)    For each q ∈ Q, there are two constants βq , ηq ∈ [0, 1[, respectively called (careless) error
            probability and guessing probability at q.
     (ii)   For any response pattern R ⊆ Q and state K ∈ K, the probability of observing R for a subject
            in state K is


                                                         30
                                                                                       
                             Y            Y                   Y               Y
                                βq         (1 − βq )            ηq             (1 − ηq ) .
                         q∈K\R        q∈K∩R                  q∈R\K        q∈Q\(R∪K)




                                                        31




View publication stats
