                                                             Review of Educational Research
                                                     Summrr 1987, Vol. 57, No. 2, pp. 175-213



                 Mastery Learning Reconsidered
                                      Robert E. Slavin
                                  Johns Hopkins University
     Several recent reviews and meta-analyses have claimed extraordinariiy positive
     effects of mastery learning oo student tchievement, ,ad Bllom (1984a, 1984b) hah
     hypothesized that mastery-based treatments sill lsoone able to produce "2-sigma"
     (i.e., 2 standard deviation) increases in achievement. This article examines the
     literature on achievement effectt sf practtcal applications of group-based mastery
     learning in elementary and secondary schools over periods of at least 4 weeks, using
     a review technique, "best-evidencc synthesis, “ “hich combines features of meta-
     analytic and traditional narrative reviews. The heview found essentially no evidence
     to support the effectiveness of group-based mastery learning on standandized achieve-
     ment measures. On experimenter-made measures, effectt were generally yositive
     but moderate in magnitude, with little evidence that effectt maintained over ttme.
     These results are discussed in light of the coverage versus mastery dilemma posed
     by group-based mastery learning.

   The term "mastery learning" refers to a large and diverse category of instructional
methods. The principal defining characteristic of mastery learning methods is the
establishment of a criterion level of performance held to represent "mastery" of a
given skill or concept, frequent assessment of student progress toward the mastery
criterion, and provision of corrective instruction to enable students who do not
initially meet the mastery criterion to do so on later parallel assessments (see Block
& Anderson, 1975; Bloom, 1976). Bloom (1976) also includes an emphasis on
appropriate use of such instructional variables as cues, participation, feedback, and
reinforcement as elements of mastery learning, but these are not uniquely defining
characteristics; rather, what defines mastery learning approaches is the organization
of time and resources to ensure that most students are able to master instructional
objectives.
   There are three primary forms of mastery learning. One, called the Personalized
System of Instruction (PSI) or the Keller Plan (Keller, 1968), is used primarily at
the postsecondary level. In this form of mastery learning, unit objectives are
established for a course of study and tests are developed for each. Students may
take the test (or parallel forms of it) as many times as they wish until they achieve
a passing score. To do this, students typically work on self-instructional materials
and/or work with peers to learn the course content, and teachers may give lectures


   This paper was written under a grant from the Office of Educational Research and
Improvement, U.S. Department of Education (No. OERI-G-86-0006). However, any opinions
expressed are those of the author and do not represent OERI policy.
   I would like to thank John Waters and Suzanne Shanahan for their assistance in locating
references, and Jere Brophy, Barak Rosenshine, Nancy Madden, Nancy Karweit, Daniel
Levine, and John Hollifìeld for their comments on earlier drafts.

                                                                                                    175

                  Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Robert E. Slavin
more to supplement than to guide the learning process (see Kulik, Kulik & Cohen,
 1979). A related form of mastery learning is continuous progress (e.g., Cohen,
 1977), where students work on individualized units entirely at their own rate.
Continuous progress mastery learning programs differ from other individualized
models only in that they establish mastery criteria for unit tests and provide
corrective activities for students who do not meet these criteria the first time.
   The third form of mastery learning is called group-based mastery learning, or
Learning for Mastery (LFM) (Block & Anderson, 1975). This is by far the most
commonly used form of mastery learning in elementary and secondary schools. In
group-based mastery learning the teacher instructs the entire class at one pace. At
the end of each unit of instruction a "formative test" is given, covering the unit's
content. A mastery criterion, usually in the range of 80-90% correct, is established
for this test. Any students who do not achieve the mastery criterion on the formative
test receive corrective instruction, which may take the form of tutoring by the
teacher or by students who did achieve at the criterion level, small group sessions
in which teachers go over skills or concepts students missed, alternative activities
or materials for students to complete independently, and so on. In describing this
form of mastery learning, Block and Anderson recommend that corrective activities
be different from the kinds of activities used in initial instruction. Following the
corrective instruction, students take a parallel formative or "summative" test. In
some cases only one cycle of formative test-corrective instruction-parallel test is
used, and the class moves on even if several students still have not achieved the
mastery criterion; in others, the cycle may be repeated two or more times until
virtually all students have gotten a passing score. All students who achieve the
mastery criterion at any point are generally given an "A" on the unit, regardless of
how many tries it took for them to reach the criterion score.
   The most recent full-scale review of research on mastery learning was published
more than a decade ago by Block and Burns (1976). However, in recent years two
meta-analyses of research in this area have appeared, one by Kulik, Kulik, and
Bangert-Drowns (1986) and one by Guskey and Gates (1985, 1986). Meta-analyses
characterize the impact of a treatment on a set of related outcomes using a common
metric called "effect size," the posttest score for the experimental group minus that
for the control group divided by the control group's standard deviation (see Glass,
McGaw, & Smith, 1981). For example, an effect size of 1.0 would indicate that, on
the average, an experimental group exceeded a control group by one standard
deviation; the average member of the experimental group would score at the level
of a student in the 84th percentile of the control group's distribution.
   Both of the recent meta-analyses of research on mastery learning report extraor-
dinary positive effects of this method on student achievement. Kulik et al. (1986)
find mean effect sizes of 0.52 for pre-college studies and 0.54 for college studies.
Guskey and Gates (1985) claim effect sizes of 0.94 at the elementary level (grades
 1-8), 0.72 at the high school level, and 0.65 at the college level. Further, Walberg
(1984) reports a mean effect size of 0.81 for "science mastery learning" and
Lysakowski and Walberg (1982) estimate an effect size for "cues, participation, and
corrective feedback," principal components of mastery learning, at 0.97. Bloom
(1984b, p. 7) claims an effect size of 1.00 "when mastery learning procedures are
done systematically and well" and has predicted that forms of mastery learning will
be able to consistently produce achievement effects of "2 sigma" (i.e., effect sizes

176


                Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                      Mastery Learning Reconsidered
of 2.00). To put these effect sizes in perspective, consider that the mean effect size
for randomized studies of one-to-one adult tutoring reported by Glass, Cohen,
Smith, and Filby (1982) was 0.62 (see Slavin, 1984a). If the effects of mastery
learning instruction approach or exceed those for one-to-one tutoring, then mastery
learning is indeed a highly effective instructional method.
   The purpose of the present article is to review the research on the effects of
group-based mastery learning on the achievement of elementary and secondary
students in an attempt to understand the validity and the practical implications of
these findings. The review uses a method for synthesizing large literatures called
"best-evidence synthesis" (Slavin, 1986a), which combines the use of effect size as
a common metric of treatment effect with narrative review procedures. Before
synthesizing the "best evidence" on practical applications of mastery learning, the
following sections discuss the theory on which group-based mastery learning is
based, how that theory is interpreted in practice, and problems inherent in research
on the achievement effects of mastery learning.
                       Mastery Learning in Theory and Practice
   The theory on which mastery learning is based is quite compelling. Particularly
in such hierarchically organized subjects as mathematics, reading, and foreign
languages, failure to learn prerequisite skills is likely to interfere with students'
learning of later skills. For example, if a student fails to learn to subtract, he or she
is sure to fail in learning long division. If instruction is directed toward ensuring
that nearly all students learn each skill in a hierarchical sequence, then students
will have the prerequisite skills necessary to enable them to learn the later skills.
Rather than accepting the idea that differences in student aptitudes will lead to
corresponding differences in student achievement, mastery learning theory holds
that instructional time and resources should be used to bring all students up to an
acceptable level of achievement. To put it another way, mastery learning theorists
suggest that rather than holding instructional time constant and allowing achieve-
ment to vary (as in traditional instruction), achievement level should be held
constant and time allowed to vary (see Bloom, 1968; Carroll, 1963).
   In an extreme form, the central contentions of mastery learning theory are
almost tautologically true. If we establish a reasonable set of learning objectives
and demand that every student achieve them at a high level regardless of how llng
that takes, then it is virtually certain that all students will ultimately achieve that
criterion. For example, imagine that students are learning to subtract two-digit
numbers with renaming. A teacher might set a mastery criterion of 80% on a test
of two-digit subtraction. After some period of instruction, the class is given a
formative test, and let's say half of the class achieves at the 80% level. The teacher
might then work with the "nonmasters" group for one or more periods, and then
give a parallel test. Say that half of the remaining students (25% of the class) pass
this time. If the teacher continues this cycle indefinitely, then all or almost all
students will ultimately learn the skill, although it may take a long time for this to
occur. Such a procedure would also accomplish two central goals of mastery
learning, particularly as explicated by Bloom (1976): to reduce the variation in
student achievement and to reduce or eliminate any correlation between aptitude
and achievement. Since all students must achieve at a high level on the subtraction
objective but students who achieve the criterion early cannot go on to new material,

                                                                                                   177

                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Robert E. Slavin
there is a ceiling effect built into the procedure that will inherently cause variation
among students to be small and will correspondingly reduce the correlation between
mathematics aptitude and subtraction performance. In fact, if we were to set the
mastery criterion at 100% and repeat the formative test-corrective instruction cycle
until all students achieved this criterion, then the variance on the subtraction test
would be zero, as would the correlation between aptitude and achievement.
   However, this begs several critical questions. If some students take much longer
than others to learn a particular objective, then one of two things must happen.
Either corrective instruction must be given outside of regular class time, or students
who achieve mastery early on will have to spend considerable amounts of time
waiting for their classmates to catch up. The first option, extra time, is expensive
and difficult to arrange, as it requires that teachers be available outside of class
time to work with the nonmasters and that some students spend a great deal more
time on any particular subject than they do ordinarily. The other option, giving
enrichment or lateral extension activities to early masters while corrective instruc-
tion is given, may or may not be beneficial for these students. For all students
mastery learning poses a dilemma, a choice between content coverage and content
mastery (see Arlin, 1984a; Mueller, 1976; Resnick, 1977). It may often be the case
that even for low achievers, spending the time to master each objective may be less
productive than covering more objectives (see, for example, Cooley & Leinhardt,
 1980).
                  Problems Inherent in Mastery Learning Research
    The nature of mastery learning theory and practice creates thorny problems for
research on the achievement effects of mastery learning strategies. These problems
fall into two principal categories: unequal time and unequal objectives.
    Unequal time. One of the fundamental propositions of mastery learning theory
is that learning should be held constant and time should be allowed to vary, rather
than the opposite situation held to exist in traditional instruction. However, if the
total instructional time allocated to a particular subject is fixed, then a common
level of learning for all students is likely to require taking time away from high
achievers to increase it for low achievers, a leveling process that would in its extreme
form be repugnant to most educators (see Arlin, 1982, 1984b; Arlin & Westbury,
 1976; Fitzpatrick, 1985; Smith, 1981).
    To avoid what Arlin (1984b) calls a "Robin Hood" approach to time allocation
in mastery learning, many applications of mastery learning provide corrective
instruction during times other than regular class time, such as during lunch, recess,
or after school (see Arlin, 1982). In short-term laboratory studies, the extra time
given to students who need corrective instruction is often substantial. For example,
Arlin and Webster (1983) conducted an experiment in which students studied a
unit on sailing under mastery or nonmastery conditions for 4 days. After taking
formative tests, mastery learning students who did not achieve a score of 80%
received individual tutoring during times other than regular class time. Nonmastery
students took the formative tests as final quizzes and did not receive tutoring.
    The mastery learning students achieved at twice the level of nonmastery students
in terms of percent correct on daily chapter tests, an effect size (ES) of more than
3.0. However, mastery learning students spent more than twice as much time
learning the same material. On a retention test taken 4 days after the last lesson,

178

                Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                       Mastery Learning Reconsidered
mastery students retained more than nonmastery students (ES = .70). However,
nonmastery students retained far more per hour of instruction than did mastery
learning students (ES = -1.17). Similarly, Gettinger (1985) found that students
who were given enough time to achieve a 100% criterion on a set of reading tasks
achieved only 15.5% more than did students who were allowed an average of half
the time allocated to the 100% mastery group.
   In recent articles published in Educational Leadership and the Educational
Researcher, Benjamin Bloom ((984a, 1184b) noted that teveral dissertations done
by his graduate students at the University of Chicago found effect sizes for mastery
learning of 1 sigma or more (i.e., one standard deviation or more above the control
group's mean). In all of these, corrective instruction was given outside of regular
class time, increasing total instructional time beyond that allocated to the control
groups. The additional time averaged 20-33% of the initial classroom instruction,
or about 1 day per week. For example, in a 2-week study in Malaysia by Nordin
(1979), an extra period for corrective instruction was provided to the mastery
learning classes, while control classes did other school work unrelated to the units
involved in the study. A 3-week study by Anania (1981) set aside one period each
week for corrective instruction. In a study by Leyton (1983), students received 2-
3 periods of corrective instruction for every 2-3 weeks of initial instruction.
   In discussing the practicality of mastery learning, Bloom (1984a, p. 9) states that
"the time or other costs of the mastery learning procedures have usually been very
small." It may be true that school districts could in theory provide tutors to
administer corrective instruction outside of regular class time; the costs of doing so
would hardly be "very small," but cost or cost-effectiveness is not at issue here. But
as a question of experimental design, the extra time often given to mastery learning
classes is a serious problem. It is virtually unheard-of in educational research
outside of the mastery learning tradition to systematically allocate an experimental
group more instructional time than a control group, except in studies of the effects
of time itself. Presumably, any sensible instructional program would produce
significantly greater achievement than a control method that allocated 20-33% less
instructional time. Studies that fail to hold time constant across treatments essen-
tially confound treatment effects with effects of additional time.
   It might be argued that mastery learning programs that provide corrective
instruction outside of regular class time produce effects that are substantially greater
per unit time than those associated with traditional instruction. However, comput-
ing "learning per unit time" is not a straightforward process. In the Arlin and
Webster (1983) experiment discussed earlier, mastery learning students passed
about twice as many items on immediate chapter tests as did control students, and
the time allocated to the mastery learning students was twice that allocated to
control. Thus, the "learning per unit time" was about equal in both groups. Yet on
a retention test only 4 days later, the items passed per unit time were considerably
higher for the control group. Which is the correct measure of learning per unit
time, that associated with the chapter tests or that associated with the retention
test?
   Many mastery learning theorists (e.g., Block, 1972; Bloom, 1976; Guskey &
Gates, 1985) have argued that the "extra time" issue is not as problematic as it
seems, because the time needed for corrective instruction should diminish over
time. The theory behind this is that by ensuring that all students have mastered the

                                                                                                   179

                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Robert E. Slavin
prerequisite skills for each new unit, the need for corrective instruction on each
successive unit should be reduced. A few very brief experiments using specially
constructed, hierarchically organized curriculum materials have demonstrated that
over as many as three successive 1-hour units, time needed for corrective instruction
does in fact diminish (Anderson, 1976; Arlin, 1973; Block, 1972). However, Arlin
(1984a) examined time-to-mastery records for students involved in a mastery
learning program over a 4-year period. In the first grade, the ratio of average time
to mastery for the slowest 25% of students to that for the fastest 25% was 2.5 to 1.
Rather than decreasing, as would have been predicted by mastery learning theorists,
this ratio increased over the 4-year period. By the fourth grade, the ratio was 4.2 to
1. Thus, while it is theoretically possible that mastery learning procedures may
ultimately reduce the need for corrective instruction, no evidence from long-term
practical applications of mastery learning supports this possibility at present.
   It should be noted that many studies of mastery learning do hold total instruction
time more or less constant across experimental and control conditions. In discussing
the "best evidence" on practical applications of mastery learning, issues of time for
corrective instruction will be explored further.
   Unequal objectives. An even thornier problem posed by research on mastery
learning revolves around the question of achievement measures used as dependent
variables. Most studies of mastery learning use experimenter-made summative
achievement tests as the criterion of learning effects. The danger inherent in the
use of such tests is that they will correspond more closely to the curriculum taught
in the mastery learning classes than to that taught in control classes. Some articles
on mastery learning experiments (e.g., Kersh, 1970; Lueckemeyer & Chiappetta,
 1981) describe considerable efforts to ensure that experimental and control classes
were pursuing the same objectives. Many studies administer the formative tests
used in the mastery learning classes as quizzes in the control classes; in theory this
should help focus the control classes on the same objectives. On the other hand,
many other studies specified that students used the same texts and other materials
but did not use formative tests in the control group or otherwise focus the control
groups on the same objectives as those pursued in the mastery learning classes (e.g.
Cabezon 1984; Crotty 1975).
   The possibility that experimenter-made tests will be biased toward the objectives
taught in experimental groups exists in all educational research that uses such tests,
but it is particularly problematic in research on mastery learning, which by its
nature focuses teachers and students on a narrow and explicitly defined set of
objectives. When careful control of instruction methods, materials, and tests is not
exercised, there is always a possibility that the control group is learning valuable
information or skills not learned in the mastery learning group but not assessed on
the experimenter-made measure.
   Even when instructional objectives are carefully matched in experimental and
control classes, use of experimenter-made tests keyed to what is taught in both
classes can introduce a bias in favor of the mastery learning treatment. As noted
earlier, when time for corrective instruction is provided during regular class time
(rather than after class or after school), mastery learning trades coverage for mastery
(see Anderson, 1985). The overall effects of this trade must be assessed using
broadly based measures. What traditional whole-class instruction is best at, at least
in theory, is covering material. Mastery learning proponents point out that material

180

                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                       Mastery Learning Reconsidered
covered is not necessarily material learned. This is certainly true, but it is just as
certainly true that material not covered is material not learned. Holding mastery
learning and control groups to the same objectives in effect finesses the issue of
instructional pace by measuring only the objectives covered by the mastery learning
classes. If the control classes in fact cover more objectives, or could have done so
had they not been held to the same pace as the mastery learning classes, this would
not be registered on the experimenter-made test.
    Two studies clearly illustrate the problems inherent in the use of experimenter-
made tests to evaluate mastery learning. One is a year-long study of mastery
learning in grades 1-6 by Anderson, Scott, and Hutlock (1976), which is described
in detail later in this review. On experimenter-made math tests, the mastery learning
classes significantly exceeded control at every grade level (mean effect size = +.64).
On a retention test administered 3 months later, the experimental-control differ-
ences were still substantial (ES = +.49). However, the experimenters also used the
mathematics scales from the standardized California Achievement Test as a de-
pendent variable. On this test the experimental-control differences were effectively
zero (ES = +.04).
    A study by Taylor (1973) in ninth-grade algebra classes—although not strictly
speaking a study of mastery learning—nevertheless illustrates the dilemma involved
in the use of experimenter-made tests in evaluation of mastery learning programs.
At the beginning of the semester, students in the experimental classes were each
given a copy of a "minimal essential skills" test and were told that to pass the
course they would need to obtain a score of at least 80% on a parallel form of the
test. About 3 weeks before the end of the semester, another parallel form of the
final test was administered to students, and the final 3 weeks was spent on remedial
work and retesting for students who needed it (while other students worked on
enrichment activities). At the end of the semester, the final test was given. A similar
procedure was followed for the second semester.
    Experimenter-made as well as standardized measures were used to assess the
 achievement effects of the program. On the minimum essential skills section of the
experimenter-made test, scores averaged 87.3% correct, dramatically higher than
they had been on the same test in the same schools the previous year (55.4%). On
 a section of the experimenter-made test covering skills "beyond, but closely related
 to, minimum essentials," differences favoring the experimental classes were still
 substantial, 44.6% correct versus 29.2%. Differences on the minimum essentials
 subtest of the standardized Cooperative Algebra Test also favored the experimental
 group (ES = +.47). However, on the section of the standardized test covering skills
 beyond minimum essentials, the control group exceeded the experimental group
 (ES = —.25).
    The Taylor (1973) intervention does not qualify as mastery learning because it
 involved only one feedback-corrective instruction cycle per semester. However, the
 study demonstrates a problem characteristic of mastery learning studies that use
 experimenter-made tests as dependent measures. Had Taylor used only the exper-
 imenter-made test, his study would have appeared to provide overwhelming support
 for the experimental procedures. However, the results for the standardized tests
 indicated that students in the control group (the previous year) were learning
 materials that did not appear on the experimenter-made tests. The attention and
 efforts of teachers as well as students were focused on a narrow set of instructional

                                                                                                   181


                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Robert E. Slavin
objectives that constituted only about 30% of the items on the broader-based
standardized measure.
   These observations concerning problems in the use of experimenter-made mea-
sures do not imply that all studies that use them should be ignored. Rather, they
are meant to suggest extreme caution and careful reading of details of each such
study before conclusions are drawn.
                                        Methods
   This review uses a method called "best-evidence synthesis," procedures described
by Slavin (1986a) for synthesizing large literatures in social science. Best-evidence
synthesis essentially combines the quantification of effect sizes and the systematic
literature search and inclusion procedures of meta-analysis (Glass et al., 1981) with
the description of individual studies and methodological and substantive issues
characteristic of traditional literature reviews. In order to allow for adequate
description of a set of studies high in internal and external validity, best-evidence
synthesis applies well-justified a priori criteria to select studies to constitute the
main body of the review (see Slavin, 1986b, for an earlier example of this procedure).
   This section, "Methods," outlines the specific procedures used in preparing the
review, including such issues as how studies were located, which were selected for
inclusion, how effect sizes were computed, how studies were categorized, and how
the question of pooling of effect sizes was handled.
                            Literature Search Procedures
   The first step in conducting the best-evidence synthesis was to locate as complete
as possible a set of studies of mastery learning. Several sources of references were
used. The ERIC system and Dissertation Abstracts produced hundreds of citations
in response to the key words "mastery learning." Additional sources of citations
included a bibliography of mastery learning studies compiled by Hymel (1982),
earlier reviews and meta-analyses on mastery learning, and references in the primary
studies. Papers presented at the American Educational Research Association meet-
ings since 1976 were solicited from their authors. Dissertations were ordered from
University Microfilms and from the University of Chicago, which does not coop-
erate with University Microfilms.
                              Criteria for Study Inclusion
   The studies on which this review is primarily based had to meet a set of a priori
criteria with respect to germaneness and methodological adequacy.
   Germaneness. To be considered germane to the review, all studies had to evaluate
group-based mastery learning programs in regular (i.e., nonspecial) elementary and
secondary classrooms. "Group-based mastery learning" was defined as any instruc-
tional method that had the following characteristics:
   1. Students were tested on their mastery of instructional objectives at least once
every 4 weeks. A mastery criterion was set (e.g., 80% correct), and students who
did not achieve this criterion on an initial formative test received corrective
instruction and a second formative or summative test. This cycle could be repeated
one or more times. Studies were included regardless of the form of corrective
instruction used and regardless of whether corrective instruction was given during
or outside of regular class time.

182


                Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                      Mastery Learning Reconsidered
   2. Before each formative test, students were taught as a total group. This
requirement excluded studies of individualized or continuous progress forms of
mastery learning and studies of the Personalized System of Instruction. However,
studies in which mastery learning students worked on individualized materials as
corrective (not initial) instruction were included.
   3. Mastery learning was the only or principal intervention. This excluded
comparisons such as those in two studies by Mevarech (1985a, 1985b) evaluating
a combination of mastery learning and cooperative learning, and comparisons
involving enhancement of cognitive entry behaviors (e.g., Leyton, 1983).
   Studies evaluating programs similar to mastery learning but conducted before
Bloom (1968) described it were excluded (e.g., Rankin, Anderson, & Bergman,
 1936). Other than this, no restrictions were placed on sources or types of publica-
tions. Every attempt was made to locate dissertations, ERIC documents, and
conference papers as well as published materials.
   Methodological Adequacy. Criteria for methodological adequacy were as followss
   1. Studies had to compare group-based mastery learning programs to traditional
group-paced instruction not using the feedback-corrective cycle. A small number
of studies (e.g., Katims & Jones, 1985; Strasler & Rochester, 1982) that compared
achievement under mastery learning to that during previous years (before mastery
learning was introduced) were excluded, on the basis that changes in grade-to-grade
promotion policies, curriculum alignment, and other trends in recent years make
year-to-year changes difficult to ascribe to any one factor.
   2. Evidence had to be given that experimental and control groups were initially
equivalent, or the degree of nonequivalence had to be quantified and capable of
being adjusted for in computing effect sizes. This excluded a small number of
studies which failed either to give pretests or to randomly assign students to
treatments (e.g., Dillashaw & Okey, 1983).
   3. Study duration had to be at least 4 weeks (20 hours). This restriction excluded
a large number of brief experiments that often used procedures that would be
difficult to replicate in practice (such as providing 1 hour of corrective instructton
for every hour of initial instruction). The reason for this restriction was to concen-
trate the review on mastery learning procedures that could in principle be used
over extended time periods. One 4-week study by Strasler (1979) was excluded on
the basis that it was really two 2-week studies on two completely unrelated topics,
ecology and geometry. The 4-week requirement caused by far the largest amount
of exclusion of studies included in previous reviews and meta-analyses. For exam-
ple, of 25 elementary and secondary achievement studies cited by Guskey and
Gates (1985), 11 (with a median duration of 1 week) were excluded by this
requirement. However, it should be noted that most of these brief studies would
also have been excluded by other criteria, principally use of individualized rather
than group-based forms of mastery learning and inclusion of only one class per
treatment (see below).
   4. At least two experimental and two control classes and/or teachers had to be
involved in the study. This excluded a few studies (e.g., Collins, 1971; Leyton,
 1983; Long, Okey, & Yeany, 1981; Mevarech, 1985a; Tenenbaum, 1982) in which,
because only one teacher taught in each treatment condition, treatment effects
were completely confounded with teacher/class effects. Also excluded were a few
studies in which several teachers were involved but each taught a different subject

                                                                                                   183

                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Robert E.Slavin
(Guskey, 1982, 1984; Okey, 1974, 1977; Rubovits, 1975). Because it would be
inappropriate to compute effect sizes across the different subjects, these studies
were seen as a set of two-class comparisons, each of which confounded teacher and
class effects with treatment effects.
   5. The achievement measure used had to be an assessment of objectives taught
in control as well as experimental classes. This requirement was liberally interpreted
and excluded only one study, a dissertation by Froemel (1980) in which the mastery
learning classes' summative tests were used as the criterion of treatment effects and
no apparent attempt was made to see that the control classes were pursuing the
same objectives. In cases in which it was unclear to what degree control classes
were held to the same objectives as experimental classes and experimenter-made
measures were used, the studies were included. These studies are identified and
discussed later in this review, and their results should be interpreted with a great
deal of caution.
   Also excluded were studies that used grades as the only dependent measures
(e.g., Mathews, 1982; Wortham, 1980). In group-based mastery learning, grades
are increased as part of the treatment, as students have opportunities to take tests
over to try to improve their scores. They are thus not appropriate as measures of
the achievement effects of the program. Similarly, studies that used time on-task
as the only dependent measure were excluded (e.g., Fitzpatrick, 1985).
                             Computation of Effect Sizes
   The size and direction of effects of mastery learning on student achievement are
presented throughout this review in terms of effect size. Effect size, as described by
Glass et al. (1981), is the difference between experimental and control posttest
means divided by the control group's posttest standard deviation. However, this
formula was adapted in the present review to take into account pretest or ability
differences between the experimental and control groups. If pretests were available,
then the formula used was the difference in experimental and control gains divided
by the control group's posttest standard deviation. If ability measures rather than
pretests were presented, then the experimental-control difference on these measures,
divided by the control group's standard deviation, was subtracted from the posttest
eirect size (this was necessary in only one case, a studΓby Cabezon, 198^). The
reason for these adjustments is that in studies of achievement, posttest scores are
so highly correlated with pretest levels that any pretest differences are likely to be
reflected in posttests, correspondingly inflating or deflating effect sizes computed
on posttests alone. These adjustments are not precisely those recommended by
Glass et al. (1981), who present formulas for dealing with gain scores that rely on
knowledge of pre-pos? correlationΓ (which are rarely reported). However, the
adjustment procedures used in the present paper follow Glass etaν. (1981) in
acccunting for pretest differences whilZ preserving the control grosp's standarS
deviation as the common metric of effect size. Such procedures as ignoring pretest
information or using standardVevfations of gain scores as thΓdenominator ?n
computing effect sizes are often seen inΓetψ-analyseΐbut are exoliciily rejecled bv
Glass and his collelgues (see Glass μt al., 1981, pp. ^Ξ5-1Ν9).
   Because individual-level standard deviations are usually of concern in mastery
learning research, most studies that met other criteria for inclusion presented data
sufficient for direct computation of effect size. In many studies, data analyses used

184


                Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                      Mastery Learning Reconsidered
class means and standard deviations, but individual-level standard deviations were
also presented. In every case (following Glass et al., 1981) the individual-level
standard deviations were used to compute effect sizes; class-level standard devia-
tions are usually much smaller than individual-level SDs, inflating effect size
estimates. Also, note that the control group standard deviation, not a pooled
standard deviation, was always used, as mastery learning often has the effect of
reducing achievement standard deviations.
   In the few cases in which data necessary for computing effect sizes were lacking
in studies which otherwise met criteria for inclusion, the studies' results were
indicated in terms of their direction and statistical significance.
        Research on Achievement Effects of Group-Based Mastery Learning
    What are the effects of group-based mastery learning on the achievement of
elementary and secondary students? In essence, there are three claims that propo-
nents of mastery learning might make for the effectiveness of mastery learning.
These are as follows:
    1. Mastery learning is more effective than traditional instruction even when
instructional time is held constant and accievement measures segister coverage as
well as mastery. This might be called the "strong claim" for the achievement effects
of mastery learning. It is clear, at least in theory, that if mastery learning procedures
greatly increase allocated time for instruction by providing enough additional time
for corrective instruction to bring all students to a high level of mastery, then
mastery learning students will achieve more than traditionally taught control
students. But it is less obviously true that the additional time for corrective
instruction is more productive in terms of student achievement than it would be
simply to increase allocated time for the control students. The "strong claim"
asserts that time used for corrective instruction (along with the other elements of
mastery learning) is indeed more productive than time used for additional instruc-
tion to the class as a whole. It is important to note that this "strong claim" might
not be endorsed by all mastery learning proponents. For example, Bloom (1976, p.
5) notes that the "time costs [necessary to enable four fifths of students to reach a
level of achievement that less than one fifth attain in nonmastery conditions] are
typically of the order of ten to twenty percent additional time over the classroom
scheduled time." However, Block and Anderson (1975) describe a form of mastery
learning that can be implemented within usual time constraints, and in practice
corrective instruction is rarely given during additional time.
    Similarly, it is clear (in theory) that if students who experienced mastery learning
are tested on the specific objectives they studied, they will score higher on those
objectives than will students who were studying similar but not identical objectives.
Further, it is likely that even if mastery learning and control classes are held to
precisely the same objectives but the control classes are not allowed to move ahead
if they finish those objectives before their mastery learning counterparts do, then
the traditional model is deprived of its natural advantage, the capacity to cover
material rapidly. A "fair" measure of student achievement in a mastery learning
experiment would have to register both coverage and mastery, so that if the control
group covered more objectives than the mastery learning group its learning of these
additional objectives would be registered. The "strong claim" would hold that, even
allowing control classes to proceed at their own rate and even using such an

                                                                                                   185

                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Robert E. Slavin
achievement measure, mastery learning would produce more achievement than
control methods.
   The best evidence for the "strong claim" would probably come from studies in
which mastery learning and control classes studied precisely the same objectives
using the same materials and lessons and the same amount of allocated time, but
in which teachers could determine their own pace of instruction and achievement
measures covered the objectives reached by the fastest-moving class. Unfortunately,
such studies are not known to exist. However, a good approximation of these
experimental design features is achieved by studies that hold allocated time constant
and use standardized tests as the criterion of achievement. Assuming that curricu-
lum materials are not specifically keyed to the standardized tests in either treatment,
these tests offer a means of registering both mastery and coverage. In such basic
skills areas as mathematics and reading, the standardized tests are likely to have a
high overlap with the objectives pursued by mastery learning teachers as well as by
control teachers.
   2. Mastery learning is an effective means of ensuring that teachers adhere to a
particular curriculum and students learn a specific set of objectives (the "curricular
focus" claim). A "weak claim" for the effectiveness of mastery learning would be
that these methods focus teachers on a particular set of objectives held to be
superior to those that might have been pursued by teachers on their own. This
might be called the "curricular focus" claim. For example, consider a survey course
on U.S. history. Left to their own devices, some teachers might teach details about
individual battles of the Civil War; others might entirely ignore the battles and
focus on the economic and political issues; and still others might approach the
topic in some third way, combine both approaches, or even teach with no particular
plan of action. A panel of curriculum experts might determine that there is a small
set of critical understandings about the Civil War that all students should have,
and they might devise a criterion-referenced test to assess these understandings. If
it can be assumed that the experts' judgments are indeed superior to those of
individual teachers, then teaching to this test may not be inappropriate, and mastery
learning may be a means of holding students and teachers to the essentials relegating
other concepts they might have learned (that are not on the criterion-referenced
test) to a marginal status. It is no accident that mastery learning grew out of the
behavioral objectives/criterion-referenced testing movement (see Bloom Hastings
& Madaus 1971); one of the central precepts of mastery learning is that once
critical objectives are identified for a given course students should be required to
master those and only those objectives Further it is interesting to note that in
recent years the mastery learning movement has often allied itself with the "curric-
ulum alignment" movement which seeks to focus teachers on objectives that
happen to be contained in district- and/or state-level criterion-referenced minimum
competency tests as well as norm-referenced standardized tests (see Levine 1985)
   The "curricular focus" claim, that mastery learning may help focus teachers and
students on certain objectives, is characterized here as a "weak claim" because it
requires a belief that any objectives other than those pursued by the mastery
learning program are of little value. Critics (e.g., Resnick, 1977) point out with
some justification that a focus on a well-defined set of minimum objectives may
place a restriction on the maximum that students might have achieved. However,
in certain circumstances it may well be justifiable to hold certain objectives to be

186

                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                      Mastery Learning Reconsidered
essential to a course of study, and mastery learning may represent an effective
means of ensuring that nearly all students have attained these objectives.
    The best evidence for the "curricular focus" claim would come from studies in
which curriculum experts formulated a common set of objectives to be pursued
equally by mastery learning and control teachers within an equal amount of
allocated time. If achievement on the criterion-referenced assessments were higher
in mastery learning than in control classes, we could at least make the argument
that the mastery learning students have learned more of the essential objectives,
even though the control group may have learned additional, presumably less
essential concepts.
    3. Mastery learning is an effective use of additional time and instructional
resources to bring almost all students to an acceptable level of achievement (the
"extra time" claim). A second "weak claim" would be that given the availability of
additional teacher and student time for corrective instruction, mastery learning is
an effective means of ensuring a minimal level of achievement for all students. As
noted earlier, in an extreme form this "extra time" claim is almost axiomatically
true. Leaving aside cases of serious learning disabilities, it should certainly be
possible to ensure that virtually all students can achieve a minimal set of objectives
in a new course if an indefinite amount of one-to-one tutoring is available to
students who initially fail to pass formative tests. However, it may be that, even
within the context of the practicable, providing students with additional instruction
if they need it will bring almost all to a reasonable level of achievement.
    The reason that this is characterized here as a "weak claim" is that it begs the
question of whether the additional time used for corrective instruction is the best
use of additional time. What could the control classes do if they also had more
instructional time? However, the "extra time" issue is not a trivial one, as it is not
impossible to routinely provide corrective instruction to students who need it
outside of regular class time. For example, this might be an effective use of
compensatory (Chapter I) or special education resource pullouts, a possibility that
is discussed later.
    The best evidence for this claim would come from studies that provided mastery
learning classes with additional time for corrective instruction and used achieve-
ment tests that covered all topics that could have been studied by the fastest-paced
classes (e.g., standardized tests). However, such studies are not known to exist; the
best existing evidence for the "extra time" claim is from studies that used experi-
menter-made achievement measures and provided corrective instruction outside of
class time.
                              Evidence for the "Strong Claim"
   Table 1 summarizes the major characteristics and findings of seven mastery
learning studies that met the inclusion criteria discussed earlier, provided equal
time for experimental and control classes, and used standardized measures of
achievement.
   Table 1 clearly indicates that the effects of mastery learning on standardized
achievement measures are extremely small, at best. The median effect size across
all seven studies is essentially zero (ES = +.04). The only study with a nontrivial
effect size (ES = +.25), a semester-long experiment in inner-city Chicago elemen-
tary schools by Katims, Smith, Steele, & Wick (1977), also had a serious design

                                                                                                   187

                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
     TABLE 1
     Equal-time studies using standardized measures
                                                                                                                                                                                   Effect sizes
88                                                                        Sample        Dura-
         Article                    Grades              Location           size         tion                   Design                       Treatments              Subjects    By group/
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Total

     Elementary
       Anderson et al.,          1-6                Lorain, OH              2 sen.      1 yr.       Students in matched ML",        ML—Followed Block               Math                          +.04
         1976                                                                                         control schools matched         (1971).
                                                                                                      on ability                    Control—Untreated
          Kersh, 1970           5                   Suburban Chi-          11 cl.       1 yr.       Teachers/classes randomly       ML—Corr. inst. included re-     Math       middled. (-)         0
                                                      cago                                            assigned to ML, control        teaching, alternative mtls.,              lower cl. (+)
                                                                                                      within each school             peer tutoring; formative
                                                                                                                                     tests given every 3-4 wks.
                                                                                                                                    Control—Untreated
          Gutkin, 1985          1                   Inner-city New        41 cl.        1 yr.       Schools randomly assigned       ML—Formative tests given        Reading                       +.12
                                                      York                                            to ML, control                 every month
                                                                                                                                    Control—Untreated
          Katimsetal.,           Upper elem.        Inner-city Chi-        19 cl.      15 wks.      1 ML, 1 cont. class from        ML—specific mtls. provided      Reading                       +.25
           1977                                       cago                                            each of 10 schools. Trts.     Control—Untreated
                                                                                                      self-selected or principal-
                                                                                                      imposed
          Jones etal., 1979 Upper elem.             Inner-city Chi-         4 sen.      1 yr.       2 ML schools matched with       ML—specific mtls. provided      Reading                       +.09
                                                      cago                                            2 control schools             Control—Untreated
     Secondary
          Slavin & Kar-         9                   Inner-city Phil-      25 cl.      26 wks.       Teachers/classes randomly       ML—Formative tests given        General    Hi         0       +.02
             weit, 1984                               adelphia                                        assigned to ML, control        every 2-3 wks.; Corr. inst.     math      Lo         0
                                                                                                                                      given by teachers.
                                                                                                                                    Control—Used same mtls.,
                                                                                                                                     tests, procedures as ML
                                                                                                                                      except for corr. inst. &
                                                                                                                                      summative tests
          Chance, 1980          8                   Inner-city New          6 cl.       5 wks.      Students within each of 3       ML—Formative tests given        Reading    Hi
                                                      Orleans                                         classes randomly assigned       every wk. Mast. crit. =                  Av
                                                                                                      to ML or control                80-90%                                   Lo
                                                                                                                                    Control—Used same mtls.,
                                                                                                                                      tests, procedures as ML
     a
      Mastery learning
     (+) Nonsignificant difference favoring ML
     0 No difference
     (-) Nonsignificant difference favoring control
                        Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                      Mastery Learning Reconsidered
flaw. Teachers were allowed to select themselves into mastery learning or control
treatments or were assigned to conditions by their principals. It is entirely possible
that the teachers who were most interested in using the new methods and materials,
or those who were named by their principals to use the new program, were better
teachers than were the control teachers. In any case, the differences were not
statistically significant when analyzed at the class level, were only marginally
significant (p = .071) for individual-level gains, and amounted to an experimental-
control difference of only 11 % of a grade equivalentt
    The Katims et al. (1977) study used a specially developed set of materials and
procedures that became known as the Chicago Mastery Learning Reading program,
or CMLR. This program provides teachers with specific instructional guides,
worksheets, formative tests, corrective activities, and extension materials. A second
study of CMLR by Jones, Monsaas, and Katims (1979) compared matched CMLR
and control schools over a full year. This study found a difference between CMLR
and control students on the Iowa Test of Basic Skills Reading Comprehension scale
that was marginally significant at the individual level but quite small (ES = +.09).
In contrast, on experimenter-made "end-of-cycle" tests the mastery learning classes
did significantly exceed control (ES = +.18). A third study of CMLR by Katims
and Jones (1985) did not qualify for inclusion in Table 1 because ii compared year-
to-year gains in grade equivalents rather than comparing experimental to control
groups. However, it is interesting to note that the difference in achievement gains
between the cohort of students who used the CMLR program and those in the
previous year who did not was only 0.16 grade equivalents, which is similar to the
results found in the Katims et al. (1977) and Jones et al. experimental-control
comparisons.
    One of the most important studies of mastery learning is the year-long Anderson,
Scott, and Hutlock (1976) experiment briefly described earlier. This study compared
students in grades 1-6 in one mastery learning and one control school in Lorain,
Ohio. The school populations were similar, but there were significant pretest
differences at thefirst-and fourth-grade levels favoring the control group. To ensure
initial equality in this nonrandomized design, students were individually matched
on the Metropolitan Readiness Test (grades 1-3) or the Otis-Lennon Intelligence
Test (grades 4-6). In the mastery learning school, students experienced the form of
 mastery learning described by Block and Anderson (1975). The teachers presented
a lesson to the class and then assessed student progress on specific objectives.
 "Errors . . . were remediated through the use of both large-group and small-group
 re-learning and review sessions. After every student had demonstrated mastery on
the formative test for each unit, the class moved on to the next unit" (Anderson et
 al., 1976, p. 4).
    One particularly important aspect of the Anderson et al. (1976) study is that it
 used both standardized tests and experimenter-made, criterion-referenced tests. The
 standardized tests were the Computations, Concepts, and Problem Solving scales
 of the California Achievement Test. The experimenter-made test was constructed
by the project director (Nicholas Hutlock) to match the objectives taught in the
 mastery learning classes. Control teachers were asked to examine the list of
 objectives and identify any they did not teach, and these were eliminated from the
 test.
    The results of the study were completely different for the two types of achieve-

                                                                                                   189


                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Robert E. Slavin
ment tests. On the experimenter-made tests, students in the mastery learning classes
achieved significantly more than did their matched counterparts at every grade
level (mean ES = +.64). A retention test based on the same objectives was given 3
months after the end of the intervention period, and mastery learning classes still
significantly exceeded control (ES = +.49). However, on the standardized tests,
these differences were not registered. Mastery learning students scored somewhat
higher than control on Computations (ES = +.17) and Problem Solving (ES =
+.07), but the control group scored higher on Concepts (ES = —.12).
   The Anderson et al. (1976) finding of marked differences in effects on standard-
ized and experimenter-made measures counsels great caution in interpreting results
of other studies that used experimenter-made measures only. In a year-long study
of mathematics, it is highly unlikely that a standardized mathematics test would
fail to register any meaningful treatment effect. Therefore, it must be assumed that
the strong positive effects found by Anderson et al. on the experimenter-made tests
are mostly or entirely due to the fact that these tests were keyed to the mastery
learning classes' objectives. It may be that the control classes covered more
objectives than the mastery learning classes, and that learning of these additional
objectives was registered on the standardized but not the experimenter-made
measures.
   Another important study of mastery learning at the elementary level is a
dissertation by Kersh (1970), in which 11fifth-gradeclasses were randomly assigned
to mastery learning or control conditions for an entire school year. Two schools
were involved, one middle-class and one lower class. Students' math achievement
was assessed about once each month in the mastery learning classes, and peer
tutoring, games, and other alternative activities were provided to students who did
not show evidence of mastery. Control classes were untreated. The study results
did not favor either treatment overall on the Stanford Achievement Test's Concepts
and Applications scales. Individual-level effect sizes could not be computed, as
only class-level means and standard deviations were reported. However, class-level
effect sizes were essentially zero in any case (ES = -.06). On an experimenter-
made criterion-referenced test not specifically keyed to the mastery objectives, the
results were no more conclusive; class-level effects slightly favored the control group
(ES = -.20). Effects somewhat favored mastery learning in the lower class school
and favored the control group in the middle-class school, but since none of the
differences approached statistical significance these trends may just reflect teacher
effects or random variation.
   In a recent study by Gutkin (1985), 41first-gradeclasses in New York City were
randomly assigned to mastery learning or control treatments. The article does not
describe the mastery learning treatment in detail, except to note that monthly
formative tests were given to assess student progress through prescribed instructional
units. The mastery learning training also included information on classroom
management skills, process-product research, and performance-based teacher edu-
cation, and teachers received extensive coaching, routine feedback from teacher
trainers, and scoring services for formative and summative tests. After one year,
mastery learning-control differences did not approach statistical significance in
Total Reading on the California Achievement Test (ES = +.12). However, effects
were more positive on a Phonics subscale (ES = +.36) than on Reading Vocabulary
(ES = +.04) or Reading Comprehension (ES = +.15). Phonics, with its easily

190


                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                       Mastery Learning Reconsidered
measurable objectives, may lend itself better to the mastery learning approach than
do reading comprehension or vocabulary.
   Studies using standardized measures at the secondary level are no more sup-
portive of the "strong claim" than are the elementary studies. A 26-week experiment
in inner-city, mostly black, Philadelphia junior and senior high schools assessed
mastery learning in ninth grade "consumer mathematics," a course provided for
students who do not qualify for Algebra I (Slavin & Karweit, 1984). Twenty-five
teachers were randomly assigned to mastery learning or control treatments, both
of which used the same books, worksheets, and quizzes in the same cycle of
activities. However, instructional pace was not held constant. After each 1-week
unit (approximately), mastery learning classes took a formative test, and then any
students who did not achieve a score of at least 80% received corrective instruction
from the teacher while those who did achieve at that level did enrichment activities.
The formative tests were used as quizzes in the control group, and after taking the
quizzes the class went on to the next unit.
   Results on a shortened version of the Comprehensive Test of Basic Skills
Computations and Concepts and Applications scales indicated no differences
between mastery learning and control treatments (ES = +.02), and no interaction
with pretest level; neither low nor high achievers benefited from the mastery learning
model. It is interesting to note that there were two other treatment conditions
evaluated in this study, a cooperative learning method called Student Teams-
Achievement Divisions (ST AD) (Slavin, 1983), and a combination of ST AD and
mastery learning. ST AD classes did achieve significantly more than control (ES =
+.19), but adding the mastery learning component to ST AD had little additional
achievement effect (ES = +.03).
   A 5-week study by Chance (1980) compared randomly assigned mastery learning
and control methods in teaching reading to students in an all-black, inner-city New
Orleans school. Approximately once each week, students in the mastery learning
groups took formative tests on unit objectives. If they did not achieve at 80% on
three quizzes or 90% on one, they received tutoring, games, and/or manipulatives
to correct their errors and had three opportunities to pass. No effects for students
at any level of prior performance were found on the Gates-McGinitie Comprehen-
sion Test. However, it may be unrealistic to expect effects on a standardized
measure after only 5 weeks.
   Overall, research on the effects of mastery learning on standardized achievement
test scores provides little support for the "strong claim" that, holding time and
objectives constant, mastery learning will accelerate student achievement. The
studies assessing these effects are not perfect; particularly when mastery learning is
applied on a fairly wide scale in depressed inner-city schools, there is reason to
question the degree to which the model was faithfully implemented. However, most
of the studies used random assignment of classes or students to treatments, study
durations approaching a full school year, and measures that registered coverage as
well as mastery. Not one of the seven studies found effects of mastery learning that
reached even conventional levels of statistical significance (even in individual-level
analyses), much less educational significance. If group-based mastery learning had
strong effects on achievement in such basic skills as reading and math, these studies
would surely have detected them.

                                                                                                   191

                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Robert E. Slavin
                      Evidence for the "Curricular Focus"Claim
   Table 2 summarizes the principal evidence for the "curricular focus" claim, that
mastery learning is an effective means of increasing student achievement of specific
skills or concepts held to be the critical objectives of a course of study. The studies
listed in the table are those that (in addition to meeting general inclusion criteria)
used experimenter-made, criterion-referenced measures and apparently provided
experimental and control classes with equal amounts of instructional time. It is
important to note that the distinction between the equal-time studies listed in Table
2 and the unequal-time studies in Table 3 is often subtle and difficult to discrimi-
nate, as many authors did not clarify when or how corrective instruction was
delivered or what the control groups were doing during the time when mastery
learning classes received corrective instruction.
   A total of nine studies met the requirements for inclusion in Table 2. Three of
these (Anderson et al., 1976; Jones et al., 1979; Kersh, 1970) were studies that used
both standardized and experimenter-made measures and were therefore also in-
cluded in Table 1 and discussed earller.
    All but one (Kersh, 1970) of the studies listed in Table 2 found positive effects
of mastery learning on achievement of specified objectives, with five studies falling
in an effect size range from +.18 to +.27. The overall median effect size for the
eight studies that used immediate posttests is +.255. However, the studies vary
widely in duration, experimental and control treatments, and other features, so this
median value should be cautiously interpreted.
    Fuchs, Tindal, and Fuchs (1985) conducted a small and somewhat unusual study
of mastery learning in rural first-grade reading classes. Students in four classes were
randomly assigned to one of two treatments. In the mastery learning classes,
students were tested on oral reading passages in their reading groups each week.
The whole reading group reviewed each passage until at least 80% of the students
could read the passage correctly at 50 words per minute. The control treatment
was held to be the form of "mastery learning" recommended by basal publishers.
These students were given unit tests every 4-6 weeks, but all students went on to
the next unit regardless of score. Surprisingly, the measure on which mastery
learning classes exceeded control was "end-of-book" tests provided with the basals
(ES = +.35), not passage reading scores that should have been more closely related
to the mastery learning procedures (ES = +.05). On both measures it was found
that while low achievers benefited from the mastery learning approach, high
achievers generally achieved more in the control classes. Since the control teachers
were presumably directing their efforts toward the objectives assessed in the end-
of-book tests to the same degree as the mastery learning teachers, the results on
this measure are probably fair measures of achievement. However, the Fuchs et al.
study may be more a study of the effects of repeated reading than of mastery
learning per se. Research on repeated reading (e.g., Dahl, 1979) has found this
practice to increase comprehension of text.
    Another small and unusual study at the elementary level was reported by Wyckoff
(1974), who randomly assigned four sixth-grade classes to experimental or control
conditions for a 9-week anthropology unit. Following teaching of each major
objective, students were quizzed. If the class median was at least 70% correct, the
class moved on to the next objective; otherwise, those who scored less than 70%

192


                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                       Mastery Learning Reconsidered
received peer tutoring or were given additional reading or exercises. The control
groups used precisely the same materials, tests, and schedule. The achievement
results were not statistically significant, but they favored the mastery learning classes
(ES = +.24). However, this trend was entirely due to effects on low performance
readers (ES = +.58), not high-ability readers (ES = +.03).
   One remarkable study spanning grades 3, 6, and 8 was reported in a dissertation
by Cabezon (1984). The author, the director of the National Center for Curriculum
Development in Chile, was charged with implementation of mastery learning
throughout that country. Forty-one elementary schools throughout Chile were
selected to serve as pilots, and an additional 2,143 schools began using mastery
learning 2 years later. Three years after the pilots had begun, Cabezon randomly
selected a sample of schools that had been using mastery learning for 3 years, for 1
year, or not at all. Within each school two classes at the third-, sixth-, and eighth-
grade levels were selected.
   The form of mastery learning used was not clearly specified, but teachers were
expected to assess student progress every 2-3 weeks and to provide corrective
instruction to those who needed it. Two subjects were involved, Spanish and
mathematics.
   Unfortunately, the classes that had used mastery learning for 3 years were found
to be much higher in socioeconomic status (SES) and mean IQ level than were
control classes. Because of this problem these comparisons did not meet the
inclusion criteria. However, the classes that had used mastery learning for 1 year
were comparable to the control classes in SES and only slightly higher in IQ.
   The study results, summarized in Table 2, indicated stronger effects of mastery
learning in Spanish than in math, and stronger effects in the early grades than in
later ones, with an overall mean of +0.27. However, while all teachers used the
same books, it is unclear to what degree control teachers were held to or even
aware of the objectives being pursued by the mastery learning schools.
   Two studies at the secondary level assessed both immediate and long-term
impacts of mastery learning. One was a study by Lueckemeyer and Chiappetta
(1981), who randomly assigned 10th graders to six mastery learning or six control
classes for a 6-week human physiology unit. In the mastery learning classes, students
were given a formative test every 2 weeks. They were then given 2 days to complete
corrective activities for any objectives on which they did not achieve an 80% score,
following which they took a second form of the test, which was used for grading
purposes. Students who achieved the 80% criterion on the first test were given
material to read or games to play while their classmates received corrective
instruction. The control group studied the same material and took the same tests,
but did not receive the 2-day corrective sessions. The control teachers were asked
to complete the three 2-week units in 6 weeks, but were not held to the same
schedule as the mastery classes. In order to have time to fit in the 2 days for
corrective instruction every 2 weeks, the mastery learning classes "had to condense
instruction.. .and to guard carefully against any wasted time (C. L. Lueckemeyer,
personal communication, November 4, 1986).
   On an immediate posttest the mastery learning classes achieved significantly
more than the control group (ES = +.39), but on a retention test given 4 weeks
later the difference had disappeared. The study's authors reported the statistically
significant effects on posttest achievement but noted that "it is questionable whether

                                                                                                   193

                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
£    TABLE 2
"^   Equal-time studies using experimenter-made measures
                                                                                                                                                                    Effect sizes
                                                             Sa
     Article                 Grades         Location              ^le      ®ζ*¯                  Design                 Treatments               Subjects      BygΓ0up/
                                                                                                                                                                                          R
                                                                                                                                                                                          ^¦¦¯
                                                                                                                                                                 measure            °
     Elementary
       Anderson et al.,        1-6        Lorain, OH           2 sch.       1 yr.       (See Table 1)            (See Table 1)                 Math            Posttest            +.64
         1976                                                                                                                                                 Retention                   +.49
                                                                                                                                                              (3 mo.)
       Kersh, 1970            5           Suburban                cl.       1 yr.       (See Table 1)            (See Table 1)                 Math                                (-)
                                            Chicago
       Jones etal., 1979 Upper            Inner-city           4 sch.       1 yr.       (See Table 1)            (See Table 1)                 Reading                             +.18
                           elem.            Chicago
       Wyckoff, 1974      6               Suburban At-         4 cl.       9 wks.      Teachers/classes ran-     ML—Mastery criterion          Anthropology   Hi+.03               +.24
                                            lanta                                        domly assigned to         70%. Corr. inst. was                       Lo +.58
                                                                                         MLa, control             either reteaching to
                                                                                                                  whole class or peer tu-
                                                                                                                  toring
                                                                                                                 Control—Used same mtls.,
                                                                                                                  tests, procedures as ML
                                                                                                                  except for corr. inst. and
                                                                                                                   summative tests
       Fuchs et al.,           1          Rural Min-           4 cl.        1 yr.       Students randomly as-    ML—Students tested on         Reading         Hi (-)              +.20
         1985                              nesota                                        signed to ML, control    oral rdg. passages each                     Lo +
                                                                                                                  wk. Whole rdg. grp. re-
                                                                                                                  viewed until 80% of stu-
                                                                                                                  dents got at least 50
                                                                                                                  wpm correct
                                                                                                                 Control—students tested
                                                                                                                  every 4-6 wks., all were
                                                                                                                  promoted w/o corr. inst.
     Elementary and secondary
       Cabezon, 1984     3,6, 8           Chile               46 cl.        1 yr.       Compared classes using ML—Not clearly specified         Spanish +.40 Gr3 + .47             +.27
                                                                                         ML to classes similar Control—Untreated                 Math +.14 Gr6 + .22
                                                                                         inSES, IQ                                                           Gr8 + .I2


                   Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Secondary
  Lueckemeyer &        10           Suburban             12 cl.       6 wks.     Students randomly as-        ML—Formative tests             Human Phys-    Posttest           +.39
  Chiappetta, 1981                    Houston                                      signed to ML, control       given every 2 wks., fol-       iology
                                                                                 Pretest differences fa-        lowed 2 days of corr.
                                                                                   vored control               inst. (criterion = 80%)
                                                                                                              Control—Used same mtls.,                      Retention (4 wks.)          0
                                                                                                               tests, procedures as ML
                                                                                                               except for corr. inst. and
                                                                                                                summative tests
    Dunkelberger &                  Suburban             10 cl.      15 wks.      Students randomly as-       ML—Students had to             Chem., Phys-   Retention (4              +.26
     Heikkinen,                       Delaware                                      signed to ML, control       meet 80% criterion on          ics            mo.)
      1984                                                                          classes. Teachers           repeatable tests to go on.
                                                                                    taught ML & control         Corrective activities
                                                                                    classes. Posttest given     available during free
                                                                                    > 4 mos. after end of       time
                                                                                    implementation pe-        Control—Used same mtls.,
                                                                                    riod                        procedures, tests. Re-
                                                                                                                ceived detailed feedback
                                                                                                                and had same corrective
                                                                                                                mtls. available during
                                                                                                                free time
    Mevarech, 1986                  Israel                4 cl.       3 mo.       Students randomly as-       ML—Students who did            Algebra        LOSES      +1.78   +.90
                                                                                    signed to ML, control       not reach 70% crit. on                      MidSES +.91
                                                                                    classes                     formative tests rec'd                       Hi SES +.66
                                                                                                                corr. inst. from tch. or
                                                                                                                peers
                                                                                                              Control—Used same mtls.,
                                                                                                                tests as ML
a
 Mastery learning
+ Significant difference favoring ML
0 No difference
(-) Nonsignificant difference favoring control




             Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Ά£   TABLE 3
     Unequal-time studies using experimenter-made                       measures (secondary)

                                                   Sample
     Article        Grades        Location                      ^ura_         Design                         Treatments             ^          Subjects                 ^ - ^               R eten
                                                                                                                                                                                             +     "
                                                      sιze       tlon                                                               tιme                                                     tlon
                                                                                  _                                                                          By group/measure       Total
     Long et al.,       8      Georgia                6 cl.     5 wks. Students randomly              Teacher-directed MLa—        Not        Earth Sci.   Teacher-directed ML
         1978                                                            assigned to 3                  Formative tests given        stated                  vs. Control:
                                                                         trts. Teachers ro-             every 2 days. Remedial                               Posttest               +.43
                                                                         tated across trts.             work given as corn inst.                             Retention (12 wks.)             +.08
                                                                                                        "If problem persists," in-                         Teacher-directed ML
                                                                                                        div. tutoring given by                              vs . Student-directed
                                                                                                        teacher                                                 ML:
                                                                                                      Student-directed ML—                                   Posttest               +.19
                                                                                                        Same formative tests                                 Retention (12 wks.)             -.03
                                                                                                        used, returned to stu-
                                                                                                        dents for self-correction
                                                                                                      Control—Same inst. but
                                                                                                        no tests, correctives
     Fagan,             7      Dallas, TX, 1         17 cl.     5 wks. 4 teachers ran-                ML—Formative tests           22%        Transp.      Posttest                 -.11
     1976                       middle                                    domly assigned                given every wk. Teachers                and En-    Retention (4 wks.)                -.15
                                class sch.,                               to ML, control                drilled students who                    viron.
                                 1 lower                                                                 failed to achieve 80%
                                class sch.                                                              criterion, then gave 2nd
                                                                                                        formative test.
                                                                                                      Control—Used same mtls.
                                                                                                        & procedures as ML.
                                                                                                        Formative tests taken as
                                                                                                        quizzes
     Hecht,            10      Urban, sub-            5 cl.     6 wks. Students randomly              ML—Formative tests           Not        Geometry                              +.31
     1980                        urban                                   assigned to ML,                given every 2 wks., fol-     stated
                                 Midwest                                 control classes.               lowed by "intensive re-
                                                                         Two teachers                   medial help"
                                                                         taught ML &                  Control—Used same mtls.
                                                                         control classes.               & procedures as ML in-
                                                                                                        cluding both 1st & 2nd
                                                                                                        formative tests, but no
                                                                                                        remedial help



                    Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Mevarech,          9      Chicago,               8 cl.    6 wks. Students randomly                 ML—Formative tests              Not       Alg. I   Algorithmic
 1980                       middle                                 assigned in 2 × 2                 given every 2 wks. Stu-        stated              Strategy +.70   , 77
                            class sch.                             design to "algo-                  dents had 3 chances to                           Heuristic
                                                                   rithmic strategy"                 obtain 80% criterion.                              Strategy +.83
                                                                   vs. "heuristic                    Corr. inst. included gφ.
                                                                   strategy" and to                  inst., peer tutoring, adult
                                                                   ML vs. control                    tutoring outside of class.
                                                                                                   Control—Used same mtis.
                                                                                                     & procedures, took
                                                                                                     formative tests as
                                                                                                     quizzes. While ML
                                                                                                     classes received corr.
                                                                                                     inst., control worked
                                                                                                     adďl problems.
a
    Mastery learning.




                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Robert E. Slavin
such a limited effect on achievement is worth the considerable time required for
the development and management of such an instructional program" (Lueckemeyer
& Chiappetta, 1981, p. 273). Further, it is unclear whether the control groups
required the full 6 weeks to cover the material. Any additional information students
in the control group learned (or could have learned) would of course not have been
registered on the experimenter-made test.
   In a 15-week experiment in ninth-grade chemistry and physics classes by Dun-
kelberger and Heikkinen (1984), students were randomly assigned to mastery
learning or control classes. In the mastery learning classes, students had several
chances to meet an 80% criterion on parallel formative tests. Control students took
the tests once and received feedback on their areas of strength and weakness. All
students, control as well as experimental, had the same corrective activities available
during a regularly scheduled free time. However, mastery learning students took
much greater advantage of these activities. The total time used by the experimental
group was thus greater than that used by control students, but since the total time
available was held constant, this was categorized as an equal-time study.
    For reasons that were not stated, the implementation of the 15-week chemistry
and physics unit was concluded in late January, but the posttests were not given
until early June, more than 4 months later. For this reason, the program's effects
are listed as retention measures only. Effects favored the mastery learning classes
(ES = +.26).
    Two studies by an Israeli student of Bloom, Zemira Mevarech, produced by far
the largest effect sizes of all the mastery learning studies that met the inclusion
criteria. One of these (Mevarech, 1980) provided additional time for corrective
instruction to the mastery learning classes and is therefore included among the
"extra time" studies listed in Table 3. The second (Mevarech, 1986) took place in
a "desegregated" Israeli junior high school (i.e., Jews of Middle Eastern and
European backgrounds attended the same school). Students were randomly assigned
to heterogeneous mastery learning or control classes. The mastery learning classes
received lessons and then took formative tests. Students who achieved a criterion
score of 70% on biweekly quizzes received corrective instruction from peers or
from the teacher, after which a second form of the test was given. Students who
achieved the mastery criterion on the first test either served as tutors or worked on
enrichment activities. Control classes received the same lessons and materials and
were given the formative tests as quizzes, but did not receive corrective instruction.
    The outcome measure was an achievement test constructed by the teachers. At
the end of the 3-month experiment, mastery learning students scored much higher
than control students on this test (ES = +.90). The results were also broken down
by students' socioeconomic level. Students whose fathers did not complete high
 school (20% of the sample) gained the most from the mastery learning program
 (ES = +1.78), followed by those whose fathers had a high school degree, 50% of
the sample (ES = +.91), and those whose fathers completed college (ES = +.66).
    In light of the extraordinary positive effects found in this study, more than three
times the median for all the studies in Table 2, it is useful to consider what may be
 unique about the Mevarech (1986) study. One important factor is that only two
 teachers were involved in each treatment, and that while students were randomly
 assigned to treatments, teachers were not assigned at random. Thus, the possibiiity
 of teacher effects cannot be ruled out; it may be that the mastery learning teachers

198

                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                      Mastery Learning Reconsidered
were simply better teachers than those in the control group. Second, as is the case
with all mastery learning studies that used experimenter-made measures, there is a
possibility that even though all teachers used the same materials, the mastery
learning teachers focused on the specific objectives to be tested more than the
control classes did. The posttest was described as covering "various aspects of
rational numbers." Because there is much more to a typical algebra course, it may
be that the mastery learning classes were spending time mastering a limited set of
objectives while the control group may have learned a larger set of objectives
(though perhaps at a lower level of mastery).
   However, bearing in mind these cautions, the 1986 Mevarech study and the
 1980 Mevarech study described later in this article provide some grounds for
optimism that certain forms of group-based mastery learning may have strong
effects on student achievement.
   Overall, the effects summarized in Table 2 could be interpreted as supporting
the "curricular focus" claim. The effects of mastery learning on experimenter-
made, criterion-referenced measures are generally moderate but consistently posi-
tive. Two studies found that the effects of mastery learning were greatest for low
achievers, as would be expected from mastery learning theory, and one found
effects to be greatest for low-SES students.
   However, the meaning of the results summarized in Table 2 is far from clear.
The near-zero effects of mastery learning on standardized measures (Table 1) and
in particular the dramatically different results for standardized and experimenter-
made measures reported by Anderson et al. (1976) suggest that the effects of
mastery learning on experimenter-made measures result from a shifting of instruc-
tional focus to a particular set of objectives not necessarily more valuable than
those pursued by the control group. Unfortunately, it is impossible to determine
from reports of mastery learning studies the degree to which control teachers were
focusing on the objectives assessed on the experimenter-made measures, yet under-
standing this is crucial to understanding the effects reported in these studies.

                           Evidence for the Extra-Time Claim
   The problem of unequal time for experimental and control groups is a serious
one in mastery learning research in general, but the inclusion criteria used in the
present review have the effect of eliminating the studies in which time differences
are extreme. Mastery learning studies in which experimental classes receive consid-
erably more instructional time than control classes are always either very brief,
rarely more than a week (e.g., Anderson, 1975, 1976; Arlin & Webster, 1983), or
they involve individualized or self-paced rather than group-paced instruction (e.g.,
Jones, 1975; Wentling, 1973). In studies of group-paced instruction conducted over
periods of at least 4 weeks, extra time for corrective instruction rarely amounts to
more than 20-25% of original time. It might be argued that additional instructional
time of this magnitude might be a practicable means of ensuring all students a
reasonable level of achievement, and the costs of such an approach might not be
far out of line with the costs of current compensatory or special education.
   Table 3 summarizes the characteristics and outcomes of group-based mastery
learning studies in which the mastery learning classes received extra time for
corrective instruction. All four of the studies in this category took place at the

                                                                                                  199

                Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Robert E. Slavin
secondary level, grades 7-10. Also, these studies are distinctly shorter (5-6 weeks)
than were most of the studies listed in Tables 1 and 2.
   The median effect size for immediate posttests from the five comparisons in four
studies is +.31, but none of three retention measures found significant differences
(median ES = —.03). However, the four studies differ markedly in experimental
procedures, so these medians have little meaning.
   The importance of the different approaches taken in different studies is clearly
illustrated in a study by Long, Okey, and Yeany (1978). In this study, eighth graders
were randomly assigned to six classes, all of which studied the same earth science
units on the same schedule. Two classes experienced a mastery learning treatment
with teacher-directed remediation. After every two class periods, students in this
treatment took a diagnostic progress test. The teacher assigned students specific
remedial work, then gave a second progress test. If students still did not achieve at
a designated level (the mastery criterion was not described in the article), the teacher
tutored them individually. In a second treatment condition, student-directed re-
mediation, students received the same instruction and tests and had the same
corrective materials available, but they were asked to use their test results to guide
their own learning, rather than having specific activities assigned. These students
did not take the second progress test and did not receive tutoring. Students in the
third treatment, control, studied the same materials on the same schedule but did
not take diagnostic progress tests. Teachers rotated across the three treatments to
minimize possible teacher effects.
   The results of the Long et al. (1978) study indicated that the teacher-directed
remediation (mastery learning) group did achieve considerably more than the
control group (ES = +.43), but exceeded the student-directed remediation group
to a much smaller degree (ES = +.19). What this suggests is that simply receiving
frequent and immediate feedback on performance may account for a substantial
portion of the mastery learning effect. A replication by the same authors (Long et
al., 1981) failed to meet the inclusion criteria because it had only one class per
treatment. However, it is interesting to note that the replication found the same
pattern of effects as the earlier Long et al. (1978) study; the teacher-directed
remediation treatment had only slightly more positive effects on student achieve-
ment than the student-directed remediation treatment, but both exceeded the
control group.
    The Long et al. (1978) study included a retention test, which indicated that
whatever effects existed at the end of the implementation period had disappeared
 12 weeks later. Retention is especially important in studies in which corrective
instruction is given outside of class time, as any determination of the cost-
effectiveness of additional time should take into account the lasting impact of the
expenditure.
    Another extra-time study which assessed retention outcomes was a dissertation
by Fagan (1976), who randomly assigned four teachers and their 17 seventh-grade
classes to mastery learning or control treatments. The mastery learning treatment
essentially followed the sequence suggested by Block and Anderson (1975). Students
were quizzed at the end of each week, and teachers worked with students who
failed to reach an 80% criterion, after which students took a second formative test.
The control classes used the same materials and procedures except that they took
the formative tests as quizzes. Teachers scored the quizzes, returned them to

200


                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                      Mastery Learning Reconsidered
students, and then went on to the next unit. The teachers followed the same
sequence of activities, but were allowed to proceed at their own pace. As a result,
the mastery learning classes took 25 days to complete the five units on "transpor-
tation and the environment," whereas control classes took only 20-21 days.
   Unfortunately, there were pretest differences favoring the control classes of
approximately 40% of a grade equivalent on Iowa Test of Basic Skills vocabulary
scores. Analyses of covariance on the posttests found no experimental-control
differences; in fact, adjusted scores slightly favored the control group (ES = —.11).
On a 4-week retention measure the control group's advantage was slightly greater
(ES = —.15). When experimental treatments vary widely in pretests or covariates,
statistical adjustments tend to underadjust (see Reichardt, 1979), so these results
must be interpreted with caution. However, even discarding the results for the one
control teacher whose classes had high pretest scores, differences still favored the
control group on the posttest (ES = —.17) and on the retention test (ES = —.23).
   A small study by Hecht (1980) compared mastery learning to control treatments
in lOth-grade geometry. Students were randomly assigned to treatments, and each
of two teachers taught mastery learning as well as control classes. In the mastery
learning classes students were given formative tests every 2 weeks that were followed
by "intensive remedial help for those who needed it" (mastery criteria and corrective
activities were not stated). Results on an experimenter-made test favored the
mastery learning classes (ES = +.31).
   The largest effect sizes for any of the studies that met the inclusion criteria were
found in two studies by Zemira Mevarech. One (Mevarech, 1986) was described
earlier. In the second (Mevarech, 1980), students were randomly assigned to eight
Algebra I classes in a 2 × 2 factorial design. One factor was "algorithmic" versus
"heuristic" instructional strategies. The "algorithmic" treatments emphasized step-
by-step solutions of algebraic problems, focusing on lower cognitive skills. The
"heuristic" treatments emphasized problem solving strategies such as Polya's (1957)
"understanding-planning-carrying out the plan-evaluating" cycle and focused on
higher cognitive skills.
   The other factor was mastery learning (feedback-correctives) versus nonmastery.
In the mastery learning treatments, students were given formative tests every 2
weeks. They then had three chances to meet the mastery criterion of 80% correct.
Corrective instruction included group instruction by the teacher, peer tutoring, and
tutoring outside of class time by teachers. The amount of additional time allocated
to provide this corrective instruction is not stated, but the author claimed the
amount of out-of-class tutoring to be small (Z. Mevarech, personal communication,
March 16, 1984). In the nonmastery treatments, students studied the same materials
and took the formative tests as quizzes. To hold the different classes to the same
schedule, nonmastery classes were given additional problems to work while mastery
learning classes were receiving corrective instruction.
   The relevant comparisions for the present review involve the mastery learning
versus nonmastery factor. Within the algorithmic classes, the mastery learning
classes exceeded nonmastery on both "lower mental process" items (i.e., algorithms)
(ES = +.30) and on "higher mental process" items (ES = +.77). Within the
heuristic classes, the effects were even greater for both "lower mental process" (ES
= +.66) and "higher mental process" items (ES = +.90).
   Overall, the evidence for the "extra time" claim is unclear. Effect sizes for the

                                                                                                   201

                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Robert E. Slavin
small number of unequal time studies summarized in Table 3 are no more positive
than were those reported for other studies using experimenter-made measures
(Table 2), in which mastery learning classes did not receive additional time. In fact,
both of the unequal time studies that assessed retention found that any effects
observed at posttest disappeared as soon as 4 weeks later. Substantial achievement
effects of extra time for corrective instruction appear to depend on provisions of
substantial amounts of extra time, well in excess of 20-25%. However, studies in
which large amounts of additional time are provided to the mastery learning classes
either involved continuous-progress forms of mastery learning or are extremely
brief and artificial. What is needed are long-term evaluations of mastery learning
models in which corrective instruction is given outside of class time, preferably
using standardized measures and/or criterion-referenced measures that register all
objectives covered by all classes.
                                       Retention
   A total of six comparisons in five studies assessed retention of achievement
effects over periods of 4-12 weeks. All six used experimenter-made measures. The
median effect size overall is essentially zero, with the largest retention effect (ES =
+.49) appearing in the Anderson et al. (1976) study, which found no differences
on standardized measures.
                                                 Discussion
   The best evidence from evaluations of practical applications of group-based
mastery learning indicates that effects of these methods are moderately positive on
experimenter-made achievement measures closely tied to the objectives taught in
the mastery learning classes and are essentially nil on standardized achievement
measures. These findings may be interpreted as supporting the "weak claim" that
mastery learning can be an effective means of holding teachers and students to a
specified set of instructional objectives, but do not support the "strong claim" that
mastery learning is more effective than traditional instruction given equal time and
achievement measures that assess coverage as well as mastery. Further, even this
"curricular focus" claim is undermined by uncertainties about the degree to which
control teachers were trying to achieve the same objectives as the mastery learning
teachers and by a failure to show effects of mastery learning on retention measures.
   These conclusions are radically different from those drawn by earlier reviewers
and meta-analysts. Not only would a mean effect size across the 17 studies
emphasized in this review come nowhere near the mean of around 1.0 claimed by
Bloom (1984a, 1984b), Guskey and Gates (1985), Lysakowski and Walberg (1982),
or Walberg (1984), but no single study reached this level. Only 2 of the 17 studies,
both by the same author, had mean effect sizes in excess of the 0.52 mean estimated
by Kulik et al. (1986) for precollege studies of mastery testing. How can this gross
discrepancy be reconciled?
   First, these different reviews focus on very different sets of studies. Almost all of
the studies cited in this review would have qualified for inclusion in any of the
meta-analyses, but the reverse is not true. For example, of 25 elementary and
secondary studies cited by Guskey and Gates (1985), only 6 qualified for inclusion
in the present review. Of 19 such studies cited by Kulik et al. (1986), only 4
qualified for inclusion in the present review. Only 2 studies, Lueckemeyer and

202

                   Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                        Mastery Learning Reconsidered
Chiappetta (1981) and Slavin and Karweit (1984), appeared in all three syntheses.
The list of mastery learning studies synthesized by Lysakowski and Walberg (1982)
is short and idiosyncratic, hardly overlapping at all with any of the other reviews,
and Bloom's (1984a) article discusses only a few University of Chicago dissertations.
   As noted earlier, the principal reason that studies cited elsewhere were excluded
in the present paper is that they did not meet the 4-week duration requirement.
The rationale for this restriction is that this review focuses on the effects of mastery
learning in practice, not in theory. It would be difficult to maintain that a 2- or 3-
week study could produce information more relevant to classroom practice than a
semester- or year-long study, partly because artificial arrangements possible in a
brief study could not be maintained over a longer period. Actually, even 4 weeks
could be seen as too short a period for external validity. However, it is useful to
examine the results of shorter implementations of mastery learning to be sure that
arbitrarily drawing a line at 4 weeks' duration does not misrepresent the evidence.
A total of 19 elementary and secondary studies with treatment durations of 1 to 3
weeks were cited by Bloom (1984a, 1984b), Kulik et al. (1986), and/or Guskey and
Gates (1985). Most of these would not have been excluded from this review on
grounds other than their brevity. For example, nine of the studies used self-
instructional or programmed materials rather than group-based mastery learning
(e.g., Anderson, 1975; Block, 1972), four more used only one class per treatment
(e.g. Swanson & Denton, 1977; Tenenbaum, 1982), one used a procedure only
tangentially related to mastery learning (Bryant, Fayne, & Gettinger, 1982), and
two failed to provide satisfactory evidence that experimental and control classes
were initially equivalent (Hymel & Mathews, 1980; Strasler, 1979).
   The remaining three studies are all dissertations by Bloom's students. Two of
these used very similar procedures. Anania (1983) randomly assigned students in
grades 4, 5, and 8 to three treatments: tutoring, mastery learning, and "conven-
tional" instruction. Only the latter two are relevant to the present review. Students
in the mastery learning treatment received two 4-day units and one 3-day unit on
probability (grades 4-5) or cartography (grade 8). At the end of this time, students
took formative tests and then had an extra period in which they received corrective
instruction if necessary; if they did not achieve at an 80% criterion level by this
time, students might receive additional tutoring after school. Burke (1983) used
nearly identical procedures to teach probability to students in grades 4-5. Nordin
(1979) compared mastery learning and control methods to teach a 2-week unit on
sets to Malaysian sixth graders. In all three studies, mastery learning students far
outperformed control; effect sizes were around 1.0 for the Anania and Burke
studies, and exceeded 2.0 for the Nordin study.
   While all three of these studies are exemplary as basic research, they all have
features that severely limit their external validity. First, they all provided significant
amounts of extra time for the mastery learning groups, from 125% (Burke, 1983)
to 133% (Nordin, 1979) of the time allocated to the control groups. Second, all
three selected subject matter that was completely new to students (finessing the
issue of student heterogeneity by starting all students at zero) and all three created
units that were completely hierarchical, which is to say that learning of the later
units depended heavily on mastery of the earlier ones. These procedures are entirely
appropriate for theory-building, which was the authors' purpose, but they are hardly
representative of conditions in usual classroom teaching, where (for example)

                                                                                                    203

                  Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Robert E. Slavin
students either enter class with different levels of prerequisite skills and/or diverge
in their skills over many months or years (see Arlin & Webster, 1983).
   In addition to excluding many studies cited elsewhere, the present review
included many studies missed in the meta-analyses. These are primarily disserta-
tions and unpublished papers (mostly AERA papers), which comprise 12 of the 17
studies emphasized in this review. Including unpublished studies is critical in any
literature review, as they are less likely to suffer from "publication bias," the
tendency for studies reporting nonsignificant or negative results not to be submitted
to or accepted by journals (see Bangert-Drowns, 1986; Rosenthal, 1979). Other
differences in study selection and computation of effect size between the present
paper and earlier reviews are important in specific cases. For example, Guskey and
Gates (1985) report effect sizes for the Jones, Monsaas, and Katims (1979) study
of+.41 for an experimenter-made measure and +.33 for a standardized test, while
the present review estimated effect sizes of +.18 and +.09, respectively. The
difference is that in the present review pretest differences (in this case favoring the
experimental group) were subtracted from the posttest differences. Similarly, Gus-
key and Gates (1985) report a single effect size of +.58 for the Anderson et al.
(1976) study, ignoring the striking difference in effects on standardized as opposed
to experimenter-made measures emphasized here.
    There are several important theoretical and practical issues raised by the studies
of group-based mastery learning reviewed here. These are discussed in the following
sections.
   Why Are Achievement Effects of Group-Based Mastery Learning So Modest?
   The most striking conclusion of the present review is that, other than perhaps
focusing teachers and students on a narrow set of objectives, group-based mastery
learning has modest to nonexistent effects on student achievement in studies of at
least 4 weeks' duration. Given the compelling nature of the theory on which
mastery learning is based, it is interesting to speculate on reasons for this.
   One possible explanation is that in long-term, practical applications of mastery
learning, the quality of training, followup, and/or materials used to support the
mastery learning approach are inadequate. One important piece of evidence in
support of this possibility comes from a recent study by Dolan and Kellam (1987),
who compared an enhanced mastery learning program to the standard mastery
learning program used in Baltimore Cityfirstgrades. The enhanced model provided
teachers with 32 hours of instruction in mastery learning principles and practices,
monthly progress meetings, classroom visits, files of formative tests, corrective
activities, and enrichment activities keyed to school district objectives, and special
curriculum materials and other resources to help teachers achieve reading objec-
tives. Teachers using the standard mastery learning procedures also used the teach-
test-corrective instruction-test cycle to achieve essentially the same reading objec-
tives, but did not have the additional training, resources, or assistance. A year-long
experiment assigned schools and teachers within schools to the two models, and
found that the enhanced mastery learning classes gained significantly more on
standardized reading tests (ES = +.39).
   A particular emphasis of the Dolan and Kellam (1987) enhanced mastery
learning model was on the quality of the materials used for corrective instruction.
In a letter explaining the extraordinary effects obtained in her studies, Zemira

204


                   Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                      Mastery Learning Reconsidered
Mevarech (personal communication, January 25, 1987) also emphasized that the
quality of the corrective procedures was a key factor in the success of her programs,
noting that "corrective activities should be creative, attractive, and designed explic-
itly to remediate the skills that have not been mastered."
    Another possible explanation for the disappointing findings of studies of group-
based mastery learning is that it is not only that the quality of corrective instruction
is lacking, but also that the amount of corrective instruction is simply not enough
to remediate the learning deficits of low achievers. In none of the studies emphasized
in this review did corrective instruction occupy more than one period per week, or
20% of all instructional time. This may be enough to get students up to criterion
on very narrowly defined skills, but not enough to identify and remediate serious
deficits, particularly when corrective instruction is given in group settings or by
peer tutors (as opposed to adult tutors). Studies of students' pace through individ-
ualized materials routinely find that the slowest students require 200-600% more
time than the fastest students to complete the same amount of material (Arlin &
Westbury, 1976; Carroll, 1963; Suppes, 1964), far more than what schools using
mastery learning are likely to be able to provide for corrective instruction (Arlin,
 1982).
    The amount of corrective instruction given in practical applications of group-
based mastery learning may be not only too little but also too late. It may be that
even 1 or 2 weeks is too long to waii io correct students' 'earning errors, and many
studies provided corrective instruction less frequently, every 3 to 4 weeks. If each
day's learning is a prerequisite for the next day's lesson, then perhaps detection and
remediation of failures to master individual skills needs to be done daily to be
effective. Further, in most applications of mastery learning, students may have
years of accumulated learning deficits that 1 day per week of corrective instructton
is unlikely to remediate.
    Time for corrective instruction in group-based mastery learning is purchased at
a cost in terms of slowing instructional pace. If this time does not produce a
substantial impact on the achievement of large numbers of students, then a
widespread though small negative impact on the learning of the majority may
balance a narrow positive impact on the learning of the few students whose learning
problems are large enough to need corrective instruction but small enough to be
correctable in one class period per week or less.
    However, it may be that the feedback-corrective cycle evaluated in the studies
reported here is simply insufficient in itself to produce a substantial improvement
in student achievement. As Bloom (1980, 1984b) has noted, there are many
variables other than feedback-correction that should go into an effective instruc-
tional program. Both the process of learning and the process of instruction are so
complex that it may be unrealistic to expect large effects on broadly based
achievement measures from any one factor; instructional quality, adaptation to
individual needs, motivation, and instructional time may all have to be impacted
at the same time to produce such effects (see Slavin, 1987).
           Is Mastery Learning a Robin Hood Approach to Instructton?
   Several critics of mastery learning (e.g., Arlin, 1984a; Resnick, 1977) have
wondered whether mastery learning simply shifts a constant amount of learning
from high to low achievers. The evidence from the present review is not inconsistent

                                                                                                   205


                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Robert E. Slavin
with that view; in several studies positive effects were found for low achievers only.
In fact, given that overall achievement means are not greatly improved by group-
based mastery learning, the reductions in standard deviations routinely seen in
studies of these methods and corresponding decreases in correlations between
pretests and posttests are simply statistical indicators of a shift in achievement from
high to low achievers. However, it is probably more accurate to say that group-
based mastery learning trades coverage for mastery. Because rapid coverage is likely
to be of greatest benefit to high achievers, whereas high mastery is of greatest benefit
to low achievers, resolving the coverage-mastery dilemma as recommended by
mastery learning theorists is likely to produce a "Robin Hood" effect as a by-
product.
   However, it is important to note that few mastery learning studies have found
the method to be detrimental to the achievement of high achievers. This may be
the case because the coverage versus mastery dilemma exists in all whole-class,
group-paced instruction, including traditional instruction. For example, Arlin and
Westbury (1976) compared individualized instruction to whole-class instruction
and found that the instructional pace set by the teachers using the whole-class
approach was equal to that of students in the 23rd percentile in the individualized
classes, supporting DahllofΓs (1971) contention that teachers set their instructional
pace according to the needs of a "steering group" of students in the 10th to 25th
percentiles of the class ability distribution. Assuming that an instructional pace
appropriate for students at the 23rd percentile is too slow for higher achievers (Barr,
 1974, 1975), then whole-class instruction in effect holds back high achievers for
the benefit of low achievers. Group-based mastery learning may thus be accentuat-
ing a "Robin Hood" tendency already present in the class-paced traditional models
to which it has been compared.
   The coverage versus mastery dilemma and the corresponding "Robin Hood"
effect are problematic only within the context of group-based mastery learning and
(at least in theory) only when instruction time is held constant. In continuous-
progress or individualized forms of mastery learning in which students can move
through material more or less at their own rates, the coverage-mastery dilemma is
much less of a concern (Arlin & Westbury, 1976). This does not imply that
continuous-progress forms of mastery learning are necessarily more effective than
group-based forms; individualization solves the instructional pace problem but
creates new problems, such as the difficulty of providing adequate direct instruction
to students performing at many levels (Slavin, 1984b). However, there are examples
of continuous-progress mastery learning programs that have positive effects on
standardized achievement tests (see, e.g. Cohen, 1977; Cohen & Rodriquez, 1980;
Slavin & Karweit, 1985; Slavin & Madden, 1987; Slavin, Madden, & Leavey,
 1984).
              Importance of Frequent, Criterion-Referenced Feedback
   Even if we accept the "weak claim" that mastery learning is an effective means
of holding teachers and students to a valuable set of instruction objectives, there is
still some question as to which elements of mastery learning account for its effects
on experimenter-made, criterion-referenced measures. There is some evidence that
much of this effect may be accounted for by frequent testing and feedback to
students rather than the entire feedback-corrective cycle. Kulik et al. (1986) report

206

                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                       Mastery Learning Reconsidered
that mastery learning studies that failed to control for frequency of testing produced
mean effect sizes almost twice those associated with studies in which mastery
learning and control classes were tested with equal frequency. Long et al. (1978)
compared mastery learning to a condition with the same frequency of testing and
found a much smaller effect than in a comparison with a control group that did
not receive tests. Looking across other studies, the pattern is complicated by the
fact that most that held testing frequency constant also held the control groups to
a slower pace than they might otherwise have attained.
                                Practical Implications
   The findings of the present review should not necessarily be interpreted as
justifying an abandonment of mastery learning, either as an instructional practice
or as a focus of research. Several widely publicized school improvement programs
based on mastery learning principles have apparently been successful (e.g., Abrams,
 1983; Levine & Stark, 1982; Menahem & Weisman, 1985; Robb, 1985), and many
effective nonmastery learning instructional strategies incorporate certain elements
of mastery learning—in particular, frequent assessment of student learning of well-
specified objectives and basing teaching decisions on the results of these assessments.
Further, the idea that students' specific learning deficits should be remediated
immediately instead of being allowed to accumulate into large and general defi-
ciencies makes a great deal of sense. It may be that more positive results are
obtained in continuous-progress forms of mastery learning, in which students work
at their own levels and rates. Use of remedial (e.g., Chapter I), special education,
or other resources to provide substantial amounts of instructional time to help
lower achieving students keep up with their classmates in critical basic skills may
also increase student achievement (Slavin & Madden, 1987). This review concerns
only the achievement effects of the group-based form of mastery learning (Block &
Anderson, 1975) most commonly used in elementary and secondary schools.
                           The "2-Sigma Problem"Revisited
   One major implication of the present review is that the "2-sigma" challenge
proposed by Bloom (1984a, 1984b) is probably unrealistic, certainly within the
context of group-based mastery learning. Bloom's claim that mastery learning can
improve achievement by more than 1 sigma (ES = +1.00) is based on brief, small,
artificial studies that provided additional instructional time to the experimental
classes. In longer term and larger studies with experimenter-made measures, effects
of group-based mastery learning are much closer to Ό sigma, and in studies with
standardized measures there is no indication of any positive effect at all. The 2-
sigma challenge (or 1-sigma claim) is misleading out of context and potentially
damaging to educational research both within and outside of the mastery learning
tradition, as it may lead researchers to belittle true, replicable, and generalizable
achievement effects in the more realistic range of 20-50% of an individual-level
standard deviation. For example, an educational intervention that produced a
reliable gain of .33 each year could, if applied to lower class schools, wipe out the
typical achievement gap between lower and middle-class children in 3 years—no
small accomplishment. Yet the claims for huge effects made by Bloom and others
could lead researchers who find effect sizes of "only" .33 to question the value of
their methods.

                                                                                                    207

                  Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Robert E. Slavin
   Clearly, much more research is needed to explore the issues raised in this review.
More studies of practical, long-term applications of mastery learning assessing the
effects of these programs on broadly based measures of achievement that register
coverage as well as mastery are especially needed; idiosyncratic features of the seven
studies that used standardized tests preclude any interpretation of those studies as
evidence that group-based mastery learning is not effective. There is very little
known about what would be required to make group-based mastery learning
instructionally effective; the Mevarech (1980, 1986) and Dolan and Kellam (1987)
studies provide some clues along these lines, but much more needs to be known.
In addition, studies carefully examining instructional pace in mastery and non-
mastery models are needed to shed light on the coverage-mastery dilemma discussed
here. Mastery learning models in which Chapter I or other remedial teachers
provide significant amounts of corrective instruction outside of regular class time
might be developed and evaluated, as well as models providing daily, brief corrective
instruction rather than waiting for learning deficits to accumulate over 1 or more
weeks. The disappointing findings of the studies discussed in this review counsel
not a retreat from this area of research but rather a redoubling and redirection of
efforts to understand how the compelling theories underlying mastery learning can
achieve their potential in practical application.
   Mastery learning theory and research has made an important contribution to
the study of instructional methods. However, to understand this contribution it is
critical to fully understand the conditions under which mastery learning has been
studied, the measures that have been used, and other study features that bear on
the internal and external validity of the findings. This best-evidence synthesis has
attempted to clarify what we have learned from research on mastery learning in
the hope that this knowledge will enrich further research and development in this
important area.
                                         References
Abrams, J. D. (1983). Overcoming racial stereotyping in Red Bank, New Jersey. School
 Administrator, 40, 5, 7.
Anania, J. (1983). The influence of instructional conditions on student learning and achieve-
 ment. Evaluation in Education: on International Review Series, 7, 3-76.
Anderson, L. W. (1975, April). Time to criterion: An experimental study. Paper presented at
 the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Washington, DC.
Anderson, L. W. (1976)) An empirical investigatioo no innividdal lifferences si time to learn.
 Journal lo Educational Psychology, 68, 226-233.
Anderson, L. W. (1985). A retrospective and prospective view of Bloom's "learning for
  mastery." In M. C. Wang & H. J. Walberg (Eds.), Adapttng instruction to individual
  differences (pp. 254-268). Berkeley, CA: McCutchan.
Anderson, L. W., Scott, C, & Hutlock, N. (1976, April). The effects of a aastery learning
 program oonelected cognitive, affective and ecological variables in grades i through s.
  Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association,
  San Francisco.
Arlin, M. (1973). Learning rate and learning rate variance under mastery learning conditions.
  Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago.
Arlin, M. (1982)) Teacher rreponsse to student time eifferences in nastery leararng. American
 Journal lo Education, 90, 334-3523
Arlin, M. (1984a). Time variability in mastery learning. American Educational Research
 Journal, 21, 103-120.

208

                   Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                        Mastery Learning Reconsidered
Arlin, M. (1984b). Time, equality, and mastery learning. Review of Educational Research,
  54, 65-86.
Arlin, M., & Webster, J. (1983). Time costs of mastery learning. Journal of Educational
  Psychology, ,5, ,87--955
Arlin, M., & Westbury, I. (1976). The leveling effect of teacher pacing on science content
   mastery. Journal of Research oo Sciencc Teaching, 13, 213-239.
Bangert-Drowns, R. L. (1986). A review of developments in meta-analytic method. Psycho-
   logical Bulletin, ,9, ,88-399.
Barr, R. C. (1974). Instructional pace differences and their effect on reading acquisition.
  Reading Research Quarterly, y, y,6-554.
Barr, R. C. (1975). How children are taught to read: Grouping and pacing. School Review,
   83, 479-498.
Block, J. H. (1972). Student learning and the setting of mastery performance standards.
  Educational Horizons, 50, 183-191.
Block, J. H., & Anderson, L. W. (1975). Mastery learning in classroom instruction. NeN
   York: MacMillan.
Block, J. H., & Burns, R. B. (1976). Mastery learning. In L. S. Shulman (Ed.), Review of
  Research in Education (Voll 4, pp. 3-49). Itasca, IL: F. E. Peacock.
Bloom, B. S. (1968). Learning for mastery. Evaluation Comment, 1, 2.
Bloom, B. S. (1976). Human characteristics and scsool learning. NeN York: McGraw-Hill.
Bloom, B. S. (1980). The new direction in educational research: Alterable variables. Phi Delta
  Kappan, 62, 382-385.
Bloom, B. S. (1984a). The 2 sigma problem: The search for methods of instruction as effective
  as one-to-one tutoring. Educational Researcher, 13(6), 4-16.
Bloom, B. S. (1984b). The search for methods of group instruction as effective as one-to-one
  tutoring. Educational Leadership, 41 (8), 4-17.
Bloom, B. S., Hastings, J. T., & Madaus, G. F. (1971). Handbook on formative and summative
   evaluation of student learning. New Yorkr McGraw-Hill.
Bryant, N. D., Fayne, H. R., & Gettinger, M. (1982). Applying the mastery model to sight
   word instruction for disabled readers. Journal of Experimental Education, 50, 116-121.
Burke, A. J. (1983). Students' potential for learrrng contrasted dnder tutorial and group
   approaches to instruction. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago.
Cabezon, E. (1984). The effects of marked changes in student achievement pattern on the
   students, theii teachers, and their parents: ThT Chilean ease Unpunlished doctoral disser-
   tation, University of Chicago.
Carroll, J. B. (1963). A model for school learning. Teachers College Record, 64, 72372323
Chance, C. E. (1980). The effects offeedback/corrective procedures on reading achievement
   and retention. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago.
Cohen, S. A. (1977). Instructional systems in reading: A report on the effects of a curriculum
   design based on a systems model. Reading World, 16, ,,58171.
Cohen, S. A., & Rodriquez, S. (1980). Experimental results that question the Ramirez-
   Castaneda model for teaching reading to first grade Mexican Americans. The Reading
   Teacher, ,4, 12-18.
Collins, K. M. (1971). An investigatton of fhe variables of Bloom's mastery learning model
  for teaching junior high school math. Unpublished doccoral dissertation, Purdue University,
   Lafayette, IN.
Cooley, W. W., & Leinhardt, G. (1980). The instruction dimensions study. Educational
   Evaluation and Policy ynalysis, 2, 7-25.
Crotty, E. K. (1975). An experimental comparison of a mastery learning and lecture-discussion
   approach to the teaching of world history. Dissertation Abstractt International, 36,1150A.
   (University Microfilms No. 76-10610)
Dahl, P. R. (1979). An experimental program for teaching high speed word recognition and
   comprehension skills. In J. E. Button, T. C. Lovitt, & T. D. Rowland (Eds.), Communication

                                                                                                    209

                  Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Robert E. Slavin
  research in learning disabilities and mental retardation (pp. 33-65). Baltimore, MD:
  University Park Press.
Dahlloff, U. (1971). Ability grouping, ,ontent talidity, and curriculum process analysisy New
  York: Teachers College Press.
Dillashaw, F. D., & Okey, J. R. (1983). Effects of a modified mastery learning strategy on
  achievement, attitudes, and on-task behavior of high school chemistry students. Journal of
  Research in Science eeaching, 20, 203-211.
Dolan, L. J., & Kellam, S. G. (1987). Preliminary report tf mastery learning intervention
  during first grade with cohort I students. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University,
  Department of Mental Hygiene, Prevention Center.
Dunkelberger, G. E., & Heikkinen, H. (1984). The influence of repeatable testing on retention
  in mastery learning. School Sciencc and Mathematics, 84, 590-5979
Fagan, J. S. (1976). Mastery learning: The relationship of mastery procedures and aptitude to
  the achievement and retention of transportation-environmental concepts by seventh grade
  students. Dissertation Abstractt Internattonal, ,6, ,981. (University Microfilms No. 76-
  6402)
Fitzpatrick, K. A. (1985, April). Group-based mastery learning: A Robin Hood approach to
  instruction! Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research
  Association, Chicago.
Froemel, J. (1980). Cognitive entry behaviors, instructional conditions, and achievement: A
  study of their interrelationships. Unpublished doctoral llssertataon, University yy ohicago.
Fuchs, L. S., Tindal, F., & Fuchs, D. (1985). A comparison of mastery yearning grocedures
  among high and low ability students. Unpublished manuscript. Vanderbilt University,
  Nashville, TN. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 259 307)
Gettinger, M. (1985). Time allocated and time spent relative to time needed for learning as
  determinants of achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 77, 3-11.
Glass, G., Cohen, L., Smith, M. L., & Filby, N. (1982). School class size. Beverly Hills, CA:
  Sage.
Glass, G., McGaw, B., & Smith, M. L. (1981). Meta-analysis in social lesearch. Beverly Hills,
  CA: Sage.
Guskey, T. R. (1982). The effects of change in instructional effectiveness on the relationship
  of teacher expectations and student achievement. Journal of Educational Research, 75,
  345-349.
Guskey, T. R. (1984). The influence of change in instructional effectiveness upon the affective
  characteristics of teachers. American Educational Research Journal, 21, 245-259.
Guskey, T. R., & Gates, S. L. (1985, April). A synthesii of fesearch on group-based mastery
  learning programs. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational
  Research Association, Chicago.
Guskey, T. R., & Gates, S. L. (1986). Synthesis of research on the effects of mastery learning
  in elementary and secondary classrooms. Educational Leadership, ,3 (8), ,3-80.
Gutkin, J. (1985, March). The effecc of diagnostic inservice training on class reading achieve-
  ment and the number of lessons covered. Papee rresented aa ahe ennual meeting go the
  American Educational Research Association, Chicago.
Hecht, L. W. (1980, April). Stalking mastery learning in iti natural habitat. Paper eresented
  at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Boston.
Hymel, G. M. (1982). Mastery learning: : :omprehensive bibliography. New Orleanea Loyola
  University.
Hymel, G. M., & Mathews, G. (1980). Effects of a mastery approach on social studies
  achievement and unit evaluation. Southern Journal of Education Research, 14, 191-204.
Jones, B. F., Monsaas, J. A., & Katims, M. (1979, April). Improving reading comprehension:
  Embedding diverse learning strategies within a mastery learning instructionalformat. Paper
  presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San
  Francisco.

210

                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                       Mastery Learning Reconsidered

Jones, F. G. (1975). The effects of mastery and aptitude on learning, retention, and time.
  Dissertation Abstractt International, 35, 6547. .University Microfilms No. 75-8126)
Katims, M., & Jones, B. F. (1985). Chicago Mastery Learning Reading: Mastery learning
  instruction and assessment of inner-city schools. Journal of Negro Education, ,4, ,69-387.
Katims, M., Smith, J. K., Steele, C, & Wick, J. W. (1977, April). The Chicago Mastery
  Learning Reading Program: An interim evaluation. Paper presented at the annual meeting
  of the American Educational Research Association, New York.
Keller, F. S. (1968). "Good-bye, teacherr.." Journal ofApplied Behavior Analysis, 1, 78-89.
Kersh, M. E. (1970). A strategy for mastery learning in fifth grade erithmetic. Unpublished
  doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago.
Kulik, C. L., Kulik, J. A., & Bangert-Drowns, R. L. (1986, April). Effects oftestingfor mastery
  on student learning. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Amerrcan Educational
  Research Association, San Francisco.
Kulik, J. A., Kulik, C. L., & Cohen, P. A. (1979). A meta-analysis of outcome studies of
  Keller's Personalized System of Instruction. American Psychologist, 34, 307-318.
Levine, D. U. (Ed.). (1985). Improving student achievement through mastery learning pro-
  grams. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Levine, D. U., & Stark, J. (1982). Instructional and organizational arrangements that improve
  achievement in inner-city schools. Educational Leadership, 39, 41-46.
Leyton, F. S. (1983). The extent to which group instruction supplemented by mastery of initial
  cognitive prerequisites spproximates the learning effectiveness of one-to-one tutorial meth-
  ods. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago.
Long, J. C, Okey, J. R., & Yeany, R. H. (1978). The effects of diagnosis with teacher- or
  student-directed remediation on science achievement and attitudes. Journal of Research in
  Science Teaching, 111505-511.
Long, J. C, Okey, J. R., & Yeany, R. H. (1981). The effects of a diagnostic-prescriptive
  teaching strategy on student achievement and attitude in biology. Journal of Research in
  Science Teaching, 18, ,,1-523.
Lueckemeyer, C. L., & Chiappetta, E. L. (1981). An investigation into the effects of a modified
  mastery learning strategy on achievement in a high school human physiology unit. Journal
  of Research in Science Teaching, ,8, ,69-273.
Lysakowski, R., & Walberg, H. (1982). Instructional effects of cues, participation, and
  corrective feedback: A quantitative synthesis. American Educational Research Journal, 19,
  559-578.
Mathews, G. S. (1982). Effects of a mastery learning strategy yy the cognitive knowledge and
  unit evaluation of students in high school lociil ssudies. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
  University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg.
Menahem, M., & Weisman, L. (1985). Improving reading ability through a mastery learning
  program: A case study. In D. Levine (Ed.), Improving student achievement through mastery
  learning programs sspp.23-240). San Francisco: :ossey-Bass.
Mevarech, Z. R. (1980). The role of teaching-learning strategies snd feedback-corrective
  procedures in developing gigher cognitive achievement. Unpublished hoctoral dissertation,
  University of Chicago.
Mevarech, Z. R. (1985a). The effects of cooperative mastery learning strategies on mathe-
  matical achievement. Journal of Educational Research, 78, ,72-377.
Mevarech, Z. R. (1985b, April). Cooperative mastery learning strategies. Papea presenten at
  the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago.
Mevarech, Z. R. (1986). The role of a feedback corrective procedure in developing mathe-
  matics achievement and self-concept in desegregated classrooms. Studies in Educational
  Evaluation, 12, 197-203.
Mueller, D. J. (1976). Mastery learning: Partly boon, partly boondoggle. Teachers College
  Record, 78, ,,-52.

                                                                                                   211


                 Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
Robert E. Slavin
Nordin, A. B. (1979). The effects of different tualities sofnstruction nn selected cognitive,
  affective, and ttme variables. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago.
Okey, J. R. (1974). Altering teacher and pupil behavior with mastery teaching. School Science
  and Mathematics, 74, 530-535.
Okey, J. R. (1977). The consequences of training teachers to use a mastery learning strategy.
  Journal of Teacher Educatton, ,8(5), 57-62.
Polya, G. (1957). How to solve it (2nd ed.). New York: Doubleday.
Rankin, P. T., Anderson, C. T., & Bergman, W. G. (1936). Ability grouping in the Detroit
  individualization experiment. In Whipple, G. M. (Ed.), The grading of pupils (35 tt yearbook
  of the National Society for the Study of Education, Part tt pp. 2777288). Bloomington, ,L:
  Public School Publishing Co.
Reichardt, C. S. (1979). The statistical analysis of data from nonequivalent group designs. In
  T. C. Cook & D. T. Campbell, Quasi-experimentation: Design nnndnalysisissues for field
  settings (pp. 147-205). Chicago: Rand McNally.
Resnick, L. B. (1977). Assuming that everyone can learn everything, will some learn less?
  School Review, 85, 445-452.
Robb, D. W. (1985). Strategies for implementing successful mastery learning programs: Case
  studies. In D. Levine (Ed.), Improving student achievement through mastery learning
  programs (pp. 255-272). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Rosenthal, R. (1979). The "file-drawer problem" and tolerance for null results. Psychological
  Bulletin, 92, 500-504.
Rubovits, J. J. (1975). A classroomfieldexperiment in mastery learning. Dissertation Abstracts
  International, 36, 2720-A. .Universiiy Microfilms No. 75-24395)
Slavin, R. E. (1983). Cooperative learning. New work: Longmana
Slavin, R. E. (1984a). Meta-analysis in education: How has it been used? Educational
  Researcher, ,3 (8), 6-15, 24-27.
Slavin, R. E. (1984b). Component building: A strategy for research-based instructional
  improvement. Elementary School Journal, 84, 255-269.
Slavin, R. E. (1986a). Best-evidence synthesis: An alternative to meta-analytic and traditional
  reviews. Educational Researcher, ,5 (9), 55-11
Slavin, R. E. (1986b). Ability grouping and student achievement in elementary schools: A best-
  evidence synthesis (Tech. Rep. No. 1). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University, Center
  for Research on Elementary and Middle Schools.
Slavin, R. E. (1987). A theory of school and classroom organization. Educational Psychologist,
  22, 89-108.
Slavin, R. E., & Karweit, N. L. (1984). Mastery learning and student teams: A factorial
  experiment in urban general mathematics classes. American Educattonal Research hournal,
  21, 725-736.
Slavin, R. E., & Karweit, N. L. (1985). Effects of whole-class, ability grouped, and individu-
  alized instruction on mathematics achievement. American Educational Research Journal,
  22, 351-367.
Slavin, R. E., & Madden, N. A. (1987, April). Effective classroom programs for rtudents at
   risk. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research
  Association, Washington, DC.
Slavin, R. E., Madden, N. A., & Leavey, M. (1984). Effects of Team Assisted Individualization
   on the mathematics achievement of academically handicapped and nonhandicapped stu-
  dents. Journal of Educational Psychology, ,6, ,13-819.
Smith, J. K. (1981, April). Philosophical considerations of mastery learninr theory. Paper
  presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Los
   Angeles.
Strasler, G. M. (1979, April). The process of transfer rr a learning for mastery setting. Paper
   presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San
   Francisco.

212


                   Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
                                                                        Mastery Learning            Reconsidered

Strasler, G. M., & Rochester, M. (1982, April). A two-year evaluation nf a aompetency-based
  secondary school project tn a learning for mastery yetting. Papep presented at the annual
  meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New York.
Suppes, P. (1964). Modern learning theory and the elementary school curriculum. American
  Educational Research Journal, 2, 79-93.
Swanson, D. H., & Denton, J. J. (1977). Learning for mastery versus personalized system of
  instruction: A comparison of remediation strategies with secondary school chemistry
   students. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, ,4, ,15-524.
Taylor, B. R. (1973). The effect of a mastery learning of minimum essentials requirement on
  achievement in ninth grade algebra. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
   Minnesota, Minneapolis.
Tenenbaum, G. (1982). A method of group instruction which is as effective as one-to-one
   tutorial instruction. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Universiiy of Chicago.
Walberg, H. J. (1984). Improving the productivity of America's schools. Educational Lead-
   ership, 41 (8), 19-27.
Wentling, T. L. (1973). Mastery versus nonmastery instruction with varying test item feedback
   treatments. Journal of Educational Psychology, 65, 50-58.
Wortham, S. C. (1980). Mastery learning ii secondarrychools: A first year report. Unpublished
   manuscript, San Antonio (TX) Public Schools. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service
   No. ED 187 387)
Wyckoff, D. B. (1974). A study of mastery learning and its effectt on achievement of sixth
  grade social studies students. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Georgia State University,
   Atlanta.
                                                   Author
ROBERT E. SLAVIN, Director, Elementary School Program, Center for Research on
 Elementary and Middle Schools, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218. Spe-
 cializations: cooperattve learning, ,chool and classroom organizatton, desegregation, main-
 streaming, field research methods.




                                                                                                           213

                  Downloaded from http://rer.aera.net at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on March 3, 2016
