CH05.qxp:FABBS_DESIGN_NE   11/20/09   2:51 PM   Page 55




           Chapter                                              5
           Learning

           Elizabeth L. Bjork and Robert Bjork
           Making Things Hard on Yourself, But in a Good Way:
           Creating Desirable Difficulties to Enhance Learning

           Henry L. Roediger, III, Kathleen B. McDermott, and
           Mark A. McDaniel
           Using Testing to Improve Learning and Memory




                                                                55
CH05.qxp:FABBS_DESIGN_NE     11/20/09      2:51 PM   Page 56




        56 Psychology and the Real World



        Making Things Hard on Yourself, But in a
        Good Way: Creating Desirable Difficulties to
        Enhance Learning
        Elizabeth Ligon Bjork and Robert A. Bjork
        University of California, Los Angeles

        䉴 Please describe your current position and research interests.
        Elizabeth Ligon Bjork: I am Professor of Psychology and Immediate-Past
        Chair of the University of California, Los Angeles, Academic Senate. My re-
        search interests have included visual attention and developmental
        processes but now focus on practical and theoretical issues in human mem-
        ory and learning, particularly the role that inhibitory processes play in an
        efficient memory system.
        Robert A. Bjork: I am Distinguished Professor and Chair of Psychology at
        the University of California, Los Angeles. My research focuses on human
        learning and memory and on the implications of the science of learning for
        instruction and training.
        䉴 How did you get interested in studying the facilitating effect of
           apparent impediments to learning?
        Elizabeth Bjork: My interests in optimizing learning were triggered by in-
        teractions with students lamenting during office hours how hard they
        had studied, only then to perform poorly on a just-given exam. This mo-
        tivated me to examine why students’ study activities were sometimes so
        ineffective.
        Robert Bjork: My interests go back to my efforts—as a graduate student—
        to understand the relationship of forgetting and learning, especially why in-
        ducing forgetting often enhances subsequent learning. My interests in the
        application of “desirable difficulties” were fanned by my experiences teach-
        ing and coaching and from what I learned as Chair of the National Research
        Council Committee on Techniques for the Enhancement of Human Per-
        formance (1988–1994).
        䉴 What has been the real-world impact of this work?
        Overall, the impact has been slight. There are multiple indications, how-
        ever, that the impact of basic research findings on educational practices is
        increasing and that, in particular, optimizing instruction will require unin-
        tuitive innovations in how the conditions of instruction are structured.



        As teachers—and learners—the two of us have had both a professional and
        personal interest in identifying the activities that make learning most effec-
        tive and efficient. What we have discovered, broadly, across our careers in re-
        search, is that optimizing learning and instruction often requires going
        against one’s intuitions, deviating from standard instructional practices, and
CH05.qxp:FABBS_DESIGN_NE   11/20/09    2:51 PM     Page 57




                             Bjork and Bjork, Creating Desirable Difficulties to Enhance Learning 57


           managing one’s own learning activities in new ways. Somewhat surprisingly,
           the trials and errors of everyday living and learning do not seem to result in
           the development of an accurate mental model of the self as learner or an ap-
           preciation of the activities that do and do not foster learning.
              The basic problem learners confront is that we can easily be misled as
           to whether we are learning effectively and have or have not achieved a
           level of learning and comprehension that will support our subsequent ac-
           cess to information or skills we are trying to learn. We can be misled by
           our subjective impressions. Rereading a chapter a second time, for exam-
           ple, can provide a sense of familiarity or perceptual fluency that we inter-
           pret as understanding or comprehension, but may actually be a product of
           low-level perceptual priming. Similarly, information coming readily to
           mind can be interpreted as evidence of learning, but could instead be a
           product of cues that are present in the study situation, but that are unlikely
           to be present at a later time. We can also be misled by our current perform-
           ance. Conditions of learning that make performance improve rapidly often
           fail to support long-term retention and transfer, whereas conditions that
           create challenges and slow the rate of apparent learning often optimize
           long-term retention and transfer.


           Learning versus Performance
           This apparent paradox is a new twist on an old and time-honored distinction
           in psychology—namely, the distinction between learning and performance.
           Performance is what we can observe and measure during instruction or
           training. Learning—that is, the more or less permanent change in knowledge
           or understanding that is the target of instruction—is something we must try
           to infer, and current performance can be a highly unreliable index of whether
           learning has occurred.


           Learning Without Performance and Performance Without Learning
           Decades ago, learning theorists were forced to distinguish between learning
           and performance because experiments revealed that considerable learning
           could happen across a period when no change was apparent in performance.
           In latent-learning experiments with animals, for example, periods of free ex-
           ploration of a maze, during which the animal’s behavior seemed aimless,
           were shown—once reward was introduced—to have produced considerable
           learning. Similarly, in research on motor skills, investigators found that learn-
           ing continued across trials during which the build-up of fatigue suppressed
           performance.
              More recently, a variety of experiments—some of which we summarize
           below—have demonstrated that the converse is true as well: Namely, sub-
           stantial improvements in performance across practice or training sessions
           can occur without significant learning (as revealed after a delay or in another
           context). To the extent, therefore, that people interpret current performance
           as a valid measure of learning, they become susceptible to misassessing
           whether learning has or has not occurred.
CH05.qxp:FABBS_DESIGN_NE     11/20/09      2:51 PM   Page 58




        58 Psychology and the Real World


        Storage Strength Versus Retrieval Strength
        At a theoretical level, we (Bjork & Bjork, 1992) distinguish between the stor-
        age strength and the retrieval strength of information or skills stored in
        memory. Storage strength reflects how entrenched or interassociated a
        memory representation is with related knowledge and skills, whereas re-
        trieval strength reflects the current activation or accessibility of that repre-
        sentation and is heavily influenced by factors such as situational cues and
        recency of study or exposure. Importantly, we assume that current per-
        formance is entirely a function of current retrieval strength, but that stor-
        age strength acts to retard the loss (forgetting) and enhance the gain
        (relearning) of retrieval strength. The key idea for present purposes is that
        conditions that most rapidly increase retrieval strength differ from the con-
        ditions that maximize the gain of storage strength. In other words, if learn-
        ers interpret current retrieval strength as storage strength, they become
        susceptible to preferring poorer conditions of learning to better conditions of
        learning.

        Introducing Desirable Difficulties to Enhance Learning
        and Instruction
        So what are these better conditions of learning that, while apparently creat-
        ing difficulty, actually lead to more durable and flexible learning? Such de-
        sirable difficulties (Bjork, 1994) include varying the conditions of learning,
        rather than keeping them constant and predictable; interleaving instruction
        on separate topics, rather than grouping instruction by topic (called block-
        ing); spacing, rather than massing, study sessions on a given topic; and using
        tests, rather than presentations, as study events.
           Before proceeding further, we need to emphasize the importance of the
        word desirable. Many difficulties are undesirable during instruction and for-
        ever after. Desirable difficulties, versus the array of undesirable difficulties,
        are desirable because they trigger encoding and retrieval processes that sup-
        port learning, comprehension, and remembering. If, however, the learner
        does not have the background knowledge or skills to respond to them suc-
        cessfully, they become undesirable difficulties.


        Varying the Conditions of Practice
        When instruction occurs under conditions that are constrained and pre-
        dictable, learning tends to become contextualized. Material is easily re-
        trieved in that context, but the learning does not support later performance
        if tested at a delay, in a different context, or both. In contrast, varying con-
        ditions of practice—even varying the environmental setting in which study
        sessions take place—can enhance recall on a later test. For example, study-
        ing the same material in two different rooms rather than twice in the same
        room leads to increased recall of that material (Smith, Glenberg, & Bjork,
        1978)—an empirical result that flies in the face of the common how-
        to-study suggestion to find a quiet, convenient place and do all your study-
        ing there.
CH05.qxp:FABBS_DESIGN_NE   11/20/09    2:51 PM      Page 59




                             Bjork and Bjork, Creating Desirable Difficulties to Enhance Learning   59

               A study of children’s learning provides a striking illustration of the bene-
           fits of varying conditions of practice. Eight-year-olds and 12-year-olds prac-
           ticed throwing beanbags at a target on the floor with their vision occluded at
           the time of each throw. For each age group, half of the children did all their
           practicing throwing to a target at a fixed distance (for example, 3 feet for the
           8-year-olds), while the other half threw to targets that were closer or farther
           away. After the learning sessions and a delay, all children were tested at the
           distance used in the fixed-practice condition for their age group (Kerr &
           Booth, 1978).
               Common sense would suggest that the children who practiced at the
           tested distance would perform better than those who had never practiced at
           that distance, but the opposite was true for both age groups. The benefits of
           variation—perhaps learning something about adjusting the parameters of
           the motor program that corresponded to the throwing motion—outweighed
           any benefits of being tested at the practiced distance. Many other studies
           have shown that when testing after training takes place under novel condi-
           tions, the benefits of variation during learning are even larger.


           Spacing Study or Practice Sessions
           The effects of distributed practice on learning are complex. Although mass-
           ing practice (for example, cramming for exams) supports short-term per-
           formance, spacing practice (for example, distributing presentations, study
           attempts, or training trials) supports long-term retention. The benefits of
           spacing on long-term retention, called the spacing effect, have been demon-
           strated for all manner of materials and tasks, types of learners (human and
           animal), and time scales; it is one of the most general and robust effects from
           across the entire history of experimental research on learning and memory.
              Rather than describing any of the myriad studies that have demonstrated
           the benefits of spacing, we will simply stress the importance of incorporat-
           ing spacing and avoiding massing in managing learning. Massing repeated-
           study activities is often not only convenient, but it can also seem logical from
           the standpoint of organizing one’s learning of different topics, and it fre-
           quently results in rapid gains in apparent learning. Good test performance
           following an all-night cramming session is certainly rewarding, but little of
           what was recallable on the test will remain recallable over time. In contrast,
           a study schedule that spaces study sessions on a particular topic can produce
           both good exam performance and good long-term retention. Furthermore, be-
           cause new learning depends on prior learning, spacing study sessions opti-
           mally can also enhance transfer of knowledge and provide a foundation for
           subsequent new learning.


           Interleaving versus Blocking Instruction on Separate
           To-Be-Learned Tasks
           Interleaving the practice of separate topics or tasks is an excellent way to in-
           troduce spacing and other learning dynamics. In a classic comparison of in-
           terleaving and blocking (Shea & Morgan, 1979), participants practiced three
CH05.qxp:FABBS_DESIGN_NE     11/20/09      2:51 PM   Page 60




        60 Psychology and the Real World


        different movement patterns, each requiring the participants to knock down
        three of six hinged barriers rapidly on a pinball-like apparatus in a prescribed
        order. All participants received 18 trials on each pattern, but in the interleaved
        condition, practice on a given trial was randomly determined, whereas in the
        blocked condition, one pattern at a time was practiced.
           As you probably suspect, participants given blocked practice improved
        more rapidly than those given interleaved/random practice. Thus, if the re-
        searchers had stopped their study at the end of training, blocking of practice
        would have seemed the superior learning procedure. But, instead, partici-
        pants returned 10 days later and were retested under either blocked or inter-
        leaved/random conditions. Under interleaved/random testing conditions,
        participants who had practiced under interleaved conditions performed far
        better than did the blocked-practice participants, who appeared, when tested
        under a random schedule, to have learned virtually nothing. Under blocked
        testing conditions, performance was essentially the same for both groups, but
        the small difference still favored the interleaved group.
           The skills literature includes many replications of the pattern that blocked
        practice appears optimal for learning, but interleaved practice actually results
        in superior long-term retention and transfer of skills, and research illustrates
        that learners—as well as instructors—are at risk of being fooled by that pat-
        tern. For example, when participants who had learned three different key-
        stroke patterns were asked to predict their performance on a test the next day,
        those given interleaved practice predicted their performance quite closely,
        whereas those given blocked practice were markedly overconfident (Simon
        & Bjork, 2001). In effect, the blocked-practice group misinterpreted their
        good performance during practice as evidence of long-term learning, rather
        than a product of the local (that is, blocked) conditions. Said differently, they
        misinterpreted the retrieval strength of a given keystroke pattern as an index
        of its storage strength.
           Other results illustrate that the benefits of interleaved practice extend be-
        yond the learning of motor skills. For example, when participants were asked
        to learn formulas for calculating the volumes of different solids, such as a
        truncated cone, in either a blocked or interleaved manner, interleaved in-
        struction enhanced performance on a delayed test. The size of the long-term
        advantage of interleaved practice was striking: 63 percent versus 20 percent
        of new problems worked correctly a week later (Rohrer & Taylor, 2007).
           More recently and surprisingly, we have found that interleaving even en-
        hances inductive learning (Kornell & Bjork, 2008). When participants were
        asked to learn the styles of each of 12 artists based on a sample of 6 paintings
        by each artist, interleaving a given artist’s paintings among the paintings by
        other artists—versus presenting that artist’s paintings one after another
        (blocking)—enhanced participants’ later ability to identify the artist respon-
        sible for each of a series of new paintings. This result is surprising because
        blocking would seem to make it easier to note the commonalities that char-
        acterize a particular artist’s style. Indeed, as illustrated in Figure 1, the ma-
        jority of participants—when asked after the test whether interleaving or
        blocking had helped them learn an artist’s style better—definitely had the
        impression that blocking had been more effective than interleaving, the op-
CH05.qxp:FABBS_DESIGN_NE        11/20/09    2:51 PM      Page 61




                                 Bjork and Bjork, Creating Desirable Difficulties to Enhance Learning     61


                                  Judged Performance                              Actual Performance
                         1.0                                             1.0
                         0.8                                             0.8

            Proportion of 0.6                               Proportion of 0.6
             Participants 0.4                                Participants 0.4

                         0.2                                             0.2
                         0.0                                             0.0
                                Blocked    Same   Interleaved                   Blocked   Same   Interleaved

           FIGURE 1 The left panel shows the proportion of participants who selected “blocked,” “in-
           terleaved,” or “the same” in response to the question: “Under which condition do you be-
           lieve you learned better?” The right panel indicates the proportion of participants who
           actually performed better in the blocked or interleaved conditions or performed the same
           in the two conditions. (Kornell & Bjork, 2008)


           posite of their actual learning. Blocking may indeed have facilitated noticing
           commonalities, but the final test required distinguishing among the artists,
           and interleaving may have fostered learning the differences as well as simi-
           larities among the styles of different artists.
              Why might interleaving enhance long-term retention and transfer? One
           theory suggests that having to resolve the interference among the different
           things under study forces learners to notice similarities and differences
           among them, resulting in the encoding of higher-order representations,
           which then foster both retention and transfer. Another explanation suggests
           that interleaving forces learners to reload memories: If required to do A, then
           B, then C, and then A again, for example, the memory for how to do A must
           be reloaded a second time, whereas doing A and then A again does not in-
           volve the same kind of reloading. Such repeated reloadings are presumed to
           foster learning and transfer to the reloading that will be required when that
           knowledge or skill is needed at a later time.
              From the standpoint of our theoretical framework (Bjork & Bjork, 1992),
           learning from reloading is an instance of a broader dynamic in human mem-
           ory: Namely, that forgetting (losing retrieval strength) creates the opportu-
           nity for increasing the storage strength of to-be-learned information or skills.
           Said differently, when some skill or knowledge is maximally accessible from
           memory, little or no learning results from additional instruction or practice.


           Generation Effects and Using Tests (Rather Than Presentations) as
           Learning Events
           An effect that rivals the spacing effect for its generality and its significance
           for instruction and learning is the generation effect, which refers to the long-
           term benefit of generating an answer, solution, or procedure versus being
           presented that answer, solution, or procedure. Basically, any time that you,
           as a learner, look up an answer or have somebody tell or show you some-
           thing that you could, drawing on current cues and your past knowledge,
           generate instead, you rob yourself of a powerful learning opportunity. Re-
           trieval, in effect, is a powerful “memory modifier” (Bjork, 1975).
CH05.qxp:FABBS_DESIGN_NE     11/20/09      2:51 PM   Page 62




        62 Psychology and the Real World


           Closely related to the generation effect are the benefits that accompany re-
        trieving information studied earlier. Much laboratory research (for example,
        Landauer & Bjork, 1978; Carrier & Pashler, 1992) has demonstrated the power
        of tests as learning events, and, in fact, a test or retrieval attempt, even when
        no corrective feedback is given, can be considerably more effective in the long
        term than reading material over and over. The reason why rereading is such
        a typical mode of studying derives, we believe, from a faulty model of how
        we learn and remember: We tend to think of our memories as working much
        like an audio/video recorder, so if we read and reread or take verbatim notes,
        the information will eventually write itself on our memories. Nothing, how-
        ever, could be further from the way we actually learn and remember.
           Unfortunately, the effectiveness of tests as learning events remains largely
        underappreciated, in part because testing is typically viewed as a vehicle of
        assessment, not a vehicle of learning. As Henry L. Roediger, Kathleen B.
        McDermott, and Mark A. McDaniel describe in their essay in this chapter,
        however, recent research using more educationally realistic materials and re-
        tention intervals has clearly demonstrated the pedagogical benefits of tests
        (for example, Roediger & Karpicke, 2006). Similar to the pattern with varia-
        tion, spacing, and interleaving, repeated study opportunities appear, in the
        short term, to be more effective than repeated testing, but testing produces
        better recall in the long term.
           Two other pedagogical benefits of tests must be mentioned: First, tests
        have metacognitive benefits in terms of indentifying whether information
        has or has not been understood and/or learned. A student’s ability, for ex-
        ample, when going back over a chapter in a textbook, to judge whether in-
        formation will be recallable on an upcoming examination is severely limited,
        whereas attempting to answer a fellow student’s questions on the chapter
        can identify what has and has not been learned.
           The second, related benefit is that tests can potentiate the effectiveness of
        subsequent study opportunities even under conditions that insure learners
        will be incorrect on the test (Kornell, Hays, & Bjork, 2009). Again, the basic
        message is that we need to spend less time restudying and more time testing
        ourselves.


        Concluding Comments
        For those of you who are students, we hope we have convinced you to take
        a more active role in your learning by introducing desirable difficulties into
        your own study activities. Above all, try to rid yourself of the idea that mem-
        ory works like a tape or video recorder and that re-exposing yourself to the
        same material over and over again will somehow write it onto your memory.
        Rather, assume that learning requires an active process of interpretation—
        that is, mapping new things we are trying to learn onto what we already
        know. (There’s a lesson here for those of you who are teachers—or parents—
        as well: Consider how you might introduce desirable difficulties into the
        teaching of your students or children.)
           Be aware, too, when rereading a chapter or your notes, that prior expo-
        sures create a sense of familiarity that can easily be confused with under-
CH05.qxp:FABBS_DESIGN_NE     11/20/09     2:51 PM     Page 63




                               Bjork and Bjork, Creating Desirable Difficulties to Enhance Learning   63

           standing. And perhaps most importantly, keep in mind that retrieval—much
           more than restudying—acts to modify your memory by making the informa-
           tion you practice retrieving more likely to be recallable again in the future
           and in different contexts. In short, try to spend less time on the input side and
           more time on the output side, such as summarizing what you have read from
           memory or getting together with friends and asking each other questions.
           Any activities that involve testing yourself—that is, activities that require
           you to retrieve or generate information, rather than just representing infor-
           mation to yourself—will make your learning both more durable and flexible.
              Finally, we cannot overstate the importance of learning how to manage
           your own learning activities. In a world that is ever more complex and rap-
           idly changing, and in which learning on one’s own is becoming ever more
           important, learning how to learn is the ultimate survival tool.

           Suggested Further Reading
           Bjork, R. A., & Bjork, E. L. (2006). Optimizing treatment and instruction: Implications
           of a new theory of disuse. In L-G. Nilsson and N. Ohta (Eds.), Memory and society: Psy-
           chological perspectives (pp. 109–133). Hove, East Sussex, England, and New York: Psy-
           chology Press.
           Bjork, R. A. (1999). Assessing our own competence: Heuristics and illusions. In D.
           Gopher and A. Koriat (Eds.), Attention and performance XVII: Cognitive regulation of per-
           formance: Interaction of theory and application (pp. 435–459). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

           References
           Bjork, R. A. (1975). Retrieval as a memory modifier. In R. Solso (Ed.), Information pro-
           cessing and cognition: The Loyola Symposium, pp. 123–144. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
           Bjork, R. A. (1994). Memory and metamemory considerations in the training of
           human beings. In J. Metcalfe and A. Shimamura (Eds.), Metacognition: Knowing about
           knowing (pp. 185–205). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
           Bjork, R. A., & Bjork, E. L. (1992). A new theory of disuse and an old theory of stimu-
           lus fluctuation. In A. Healy, S. Kosslyn, & R. Shiffrin (Eds.), From learning processes to
           cognitive processes: Essays in honor of William K. Estes (Vol. 2, pp. 35–67). Hillsdale, NJ:
           Erlbaum.
           Carrier, M., & Pashler, H. (1992). The influence of retrieval on retention. Memory &
           Cognition, 20, 633–642.
           Kerr, R., & Booth, B. (1978). Specific and varied practice of a motor skill. Perceptual and
           Motor Skills, 46, 395–401.
           Kornell, N., & Bjork, R. A. (2008). Learning concepts and categories: Is spacing the
           “enemy of induction”? Psychological Science, 19, 585–592.
           Kornell, N., Hays, M. J., & Bjork, R. A. (2009). Unsuccessful retrieval attempts enhance
           subsequent learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cogni-
           tion, 35, 989–998.
           Landauer, T. K., & Bjork, R. A. (1978). Optimum rehearsal patterns and name learn-
           ing. In M. M. Gruneberg, P. E. Morris, & R. N. Sykes (Eds.), Practical aspects of memory
           (pp. 625–632). London: Academic Press.
           Roediger, H.L., & Karpicke, J.D. (2006). Test-enhanced learning: Taking memory tests
           improves long-term retention. Psychological Science, 17, 249–255.
           Rohrer, D., & Taylor, K. (2007). The shuffling of mathematics practice problems im-
           proves learning. Instructional Science, 35, 481–498.
CH05.qxp:FABBS_DESIGN_NE     11/20/09      2:51 PM   Page 64




        64 Psychology and the Real World


        Shea, J.B., & Morgan, R.L. (1979). Contextual interference effects on the acquisition,
        retention, and transfer of a motor skill. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
        Learning and Memory, 5, 179–187.
        Simon, D., & Bjork, R. A. (2001). Metacognition in motor learning. Journal of Experi-
        mental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27, 907–912.
        Smith, S. M., Glenberg, A. M., & Bjork, R. A. (1978). Environmental context and
        human memory. Memory & Cognition, 6, 342–353.
